OFFICE FOR NATIONAL STATISTICS




STANDARD
OCCUPATIONAL
CLASSIFICATION 2000
Volume 1
Structure and descriptions of unit groups




London: The Stationery Office
About the Office for National Statistics

The Office for National Statistics (ONS) is the Government Agency responsible for compiling,
analysing and disseminating many of the United Kingdom’s economic, social and demographic
statistics, including the retail prices index, trade figures and labour market data, as well as the periodic
census of the population and health statistics. The Director of ONS is also Head of the Government
Statistical Service (GSS) and Registrar-General in England and Wales and the agency carries out all
statutory registration of births, marriages and deaths there.




Editorial policy statement

The Office for National Statistics works in partnership with others in the Government Statistical Service to
provide Parliament, government and the wider community with the statistical information, analysis and advice
needed to improve decision-making, stimulate research and inform debate. It also registers key life events. It
aims to provide an authoritative and impartial picture of society and a window on the work and performance
of government, allowing the impact of government policies and actions to be assessed.




Information services

For general enquiries about official statistics, please contact:

The National Statistics Public Enquiry Service: TEL 020-7533 5888
                                                TEXTPHONE (MINICOM) 01633 812399



Alternatively write to the National Statistics Public Enquiry Service, Zone DG/18, 1 Drummond Gate,
London, SW1V 2QQ. Fax 020 7533 6261or e-mail info@statistics.gov.uk

Most National Statistics publications are published by The Stationery Office and can be obtained from
The Publications Centre, P.O. Box 276, London, SW8 5DT. Tel 0870 600 5522 or fax 0870 600 5333

ONS can be contacted on the Internet at http://www.statistics.gov.uk (from the 7th June 2000)




        © Crown copyright 2000. Published with the permission of the Office for National Statistics
                    on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty's Stationery Office.

       If you wish to reproduce any items in this publication, contact the ONS Copyright Manager,
     Zone B1/09, 1 Drummond Gate, London, SW1V 2QQ. Tel 020 7533 5674 or fax 020 7533 5685.



                                        ISBN 0 11 621388 4




                          Cover artwork by Shain Bali, onsdesign
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
In the revision and compilation of this classification, the Government Statistical Service
acknowledges the major work undertaken by staff at the Institute for Employment Research:
Professor Peter Elias, Abigail McKnight, Rhys Davies and Margaret Birch.
The work was strongly supported through a Steering Group comprising staff from the
Office for National Statistics, the Department for Education and Employment, the
Employment Service, the Health and Safety Executive, the General Register Office for
Scotland, the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency.
The preparation of this publication was also made possible with the considerable help and
co-operation of many organisations and individuals who commented on consultative
documents, supplied information, and offered constructive suggestions.
Navigate through this PDF by using Bookmarks, Thumbnails or Links.
Bookmarks and Thumbnails can be accessed in the Navigation pane at the left of the screen.
Links are provided between entries in the Contents list, the List of Tables and their respective destinations.




                                                                                                                                                             Contents
                 CONTENTS
                 Select the HAND tool and click on the title below
                 to enlarge the text for easier reading.
                 Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

                                                                                                                                                  Page

                  List of Tables and Figures ............................................................................................... vii

                  Preface ............................................................................................................................. ix

                  Introduction....................................................................................................................... 1

                      General background and introduction .......................................................................... 1

                      The SOC manual .......................................................................................................... 2

                      Principles and concepts ................................................................................................ 3

                      Updating of SOC........................................................................................................ 17

                  References....................................................................................................................... 18

                  Structure of the Classification ......................................................................................... 19

                  Definition of the Major, Sub-major, Minor and Unit Groups of the Classification

                      Major Group

                        1. Managers and Senior Officials ............................................................................ 37
                        2. Professional Occupations .................................................................................... 69
                        3. Associate Professional and Technical Occupations ........................................... 101
                        4. Administrative and Secretarial Occupations ..................................................... 155
                        5. Skilled Trades Occupations ............................................................................... 171
                        6. Personal Service Occupations ........................................................................... 207
                        7. Sales and Customer Service Occupations ......................................................... 225
                        8. Process, Plant and Machine Operatives............................................................. 233
                        9. Elementary Occupations .................................................................................... 261




                                                                                            Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1          v
                                                                                                           List of Tables and Figures
LIST OF TABLES AND FIGURES


                                                                                                   Page

Table 1    Skill levels and the sub-major group structure of SOC2000 and                             6
           SOC90

Table 2    General Nature of Qualifications, Training and Experience for                            12
           Occupations in SOC Major Groups

Figure 1   The changing structure of male employment, England and Wales,                            15
           1991 and 1996/7: a comparison of SOC90 and SOC2000

Figure 2   The changing structure of female employment, England and                                 16
           Wales, 1991 and 1996/7: a comparison of SOC90 and SOC2000




                                              Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1     vii
                                                                                                                                           Preface
PREFACE

In 1990 the first single classification of occupations was introduced in the United Kingdom.
This classification, known as the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC90), was
subsequently adopted by most government departments and agencies responsible for the
production of occupationally classified information or the processing of occupational data.
Across a wide variety of statistical sources and for many different functions, for example,
vital registration, job matching, analysis of labour market trends, SOC90 has become the
common single classification.

Occupational information serves a variety of purposes. It informs the job matching functions
undertaken by employment agencies, provides career information for leavers from the
educational sectors and other labour market entrants and, via statistical analysis of trends,
yields guidance for the development of labour market policies – especially those which
relate to the promotion of work-based training. While there are substantial benefits to be
gained from using a single classification of occupations for these purposes, these gains
will only continue to be realised if the classification is kept up-to-date. As the pace of
technological progress quickens and as work becomes differently organised, so the
occupational map changes. In many areas of work SOC90 now appears out-of-date. Some
new occupations are difficult to position in the classification, whilst other parts of the
classification are gradually becoming defunct.

Such problems were anticipated when SOC90 was introduced. A decision was made by
the statistical body then responsible1 for SOC90, that new job titles would be positioned in
a revised index to SOC90 and that the structure of the classification would be reviewed
prior to the next Census of Population in 2001. In 1995 a revised index to SOC90 was
published. The present volume completes the review process by revising the structure of
the classification.

The conceptual basis of the classification remains unchanged. Jobs are classified in terms
of their skill level and skill content. Within the context of the classification, ‘skill’ is
defined in terms of the nature and duration of the qualifications, training and work experience
required to become competent to perform the associated tasks in a particular job. The
revision process has focused upon particular areas of the classification where changes in
the organisation of work or in the type of work performed have been most apparent. These
include jobs related to information and communication technologies, culture, media, sports
and leisure. Managerial occupations have also been subject to extensive scrutiny and to
some redefinition in SOC2000 given the extent to which the United Kingdom was found
to be different from other European Union countries in this area of classification. The
terminology of the classification has also been revised thoroughly.



1
    Responsibility for the Standard Occupational Classification originally rested with the Central Statistical Office, although the
    task of maintaining the classification was given to the (then) Office of Population Censuses and Surveys. Following the
    reorganisation of official statistics, responsibility for the classification passed to the Office for National Statistics.




                                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1           ix
Preface



          Variations in skill requirements will be found from job to job and between different
          workplaces. Consequently, not all definitions can be expected to coincide exactly with
          specific jobs in any particular establishment or in a given locality. For this reason the
          classification should not be regarded as setting any standard or relative level in terms of
          pay, hours worked or as a part of the legal regulation of the terms and conditions of
          employment.

          No single classification system can satisfy the requirements of every potential user. It is
          hoped that the straightforward and structured approach adopted in SOC2000 as in SOC90,
          and its improved compatibility with the international standard, will ensure that SOC2000
          continues to meet the classification needs of users and producers of occupational data.




          x   Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                             Introduction
INTRODUCTION

1.    General background and introduction

The Standard Occupational Classification, first introduced in 1990, is maintained by the
Occupational Information Unit (OIU) of the Office for National Statistics (ONS). The
OIU conducts its maintenance functions on a day-by-day basis by responding to user queries,
collecting and collating information on new occupational areas and by developing databases
of occupational information for the purpose of revising the classification. The OIU also
has longer-term responsibilities to prepare and publish revisions to the classification index
and the structure of the classification.

As part of this longer-term work programme, the OIU published a new coding index to
SOC90 in 1995. To prepare for revision of the classification, the OIU began to consult
with users of occupational information in 1996 regarding the need for and the nature of
any potential revision. From this consultation, a number of deficiencies within SOC90
were identified. These were:

      • users found it difficult to classify job titles to SOC90. The conceptual principles
        of the classification were unclear, leading to ambiguities in the positioning of job
        titles within the structure of SOC90;

      • in attempting to undertake job-matching work, the Employment Service was
        particularly hampered by the broad nature of certain occupational categories. Job
        seekers often had quite well-defined job preferences and the Employment Service
        had difficulties matching these to vacancy information;

      • certain occupational areas were developing rapidly, but were not well-defined in
        SOC90. These included information technology occupations, customer service
        jobs, conservation and environment-related occupations and a wide range of jobs
        in what can loosely be termed ‘caring’ and ‘community work’ occupations.

Pressures to revise SOC90 were arising from other developments. In 1992 the Statistical
Office of the European Communities (Eurostat) commenced a programme of work to
harmonise national occupational classifications across the European Union. This was
achieved by mapping national statistical classifications to an agreed implementation of the
international standard classification, known as ISCO 88(COM). Subsequently, countries
submitted Labour Force Survey and Population Census data to Eurostat classified to this
common standard. Statistical analysis of these data showed that, for the UK, there appeared
to exist a severe definitional problem with the category termed Corporate managers (Elias,
1996). Defined as the managers of organisations and enterprises with 10 employees or
more, the UK had virtually three times the EU average percentage of its workforce classified
to this category. While some variation in occupational structure between EU countries is
to be expected, a difference of this scale was indicative of a significant classification problem.




                                                    Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   1
Introduction



               Another source of pressure to reform SOC90 arose from the Review of Social Classifications.
               Social class classifications2 have been in use in the UK for a long period, but had developed
               in a haphazard and rather unscientific manner. Starting in 1997, and undertaken as a joint
               collaboration between the Economic and Social Research Council and the Office for
               National Statistics, the Review proposed a conceptual basis for social classification and
               undertook a major analytical research programme leading to the development of a new
               social classification which uses the unit groups of SOC90 as its main ‘building blocks’3 .
               Although the concept of ‘skill’ does not feature explicitly in this classification4, the associated
               research and development work revealed a number of issues that could be addressed in its
               revision5 .

               Following from the OIU consultation process, an interdepartmental body was formed to
               consider all of this evidence and to make recommendations regarding the nature of the
               revision process. This body concluded that there was a clear indication of a need to update
               SOC90. The Institute for Employment Research (IER) at the University of Warwick, in
               collaboration with the OIU, was contracted to undertake the work required for revision - a
               process which was to be completed by 2000 in preparation for the Census of Population in
               2001. However, a number of constraints would regulate the scale of the revision of SOC90.
               First, it was recognised that many users were keen to retain as much continuity with SOC90
               as possible. Although the inadequacies of SOC90 and the rapid changes in the structure of
               jobs would inevitably mean that a revised classification would create some discontinuity,
               this desire for continuity translated into a requirement that the conceptual basis of the
               classification should not be changed, nor should its major group structure be altered. A
               second constraint derived from the need to improve alignment with the International
               Standard Classification of Occupations, itself not due for revision before 2008. Besides
               these strictures, a more practical consideration acted as a significant constraint on the revision
               process - the limited resources available for the work. Earlier classifications had consumed
               significant resources in terms of time and money6 . Efficiency gains through access to
               large computerised databases were used to offset this comparative reduction in resources
               to some extent.

               2.       The SOC Manual

               The present manual is being published to enable operational users in both research/statistical
               and client-oriented applications to use SOC in as consistent a way as possible; and to
               enable users of SOC-based occupational statistics to understand the classificatory principles
               and coding practices according to which those statistics are produced. The manual is
               published as two volumes.


               2
                    The two main social classifications in the UK are Social Class and Socio-economic Groups.
               3
                     See Rose and O’Reilly (1998).
               4
                    See Elias (1997).
               5
                    A consequence of this process is that the new National Statistics Socio-economic Classification will need to be re-based on
                    SOC2000. This work is in hand and will be completed during 2000.
               6
                    The Classification of Occupations and Directory of Occupational Titles (CODOT), introduced in 1972 was preceded by a six-
                    year programme of data collection and research. SOC90 took four years to develop. SOC2000 had to be completed within two
                    years.




               2        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                            Introduction
The remainder of Volume 1 comprises the following sections. Section 3 gives a brief
account of some important principles, concepts and conventions according to which SOC
has been developed. Section 4 describes the position on updating SOC. Section 5 sets out
the detailed SOC structure of Unit, Minor, Sub-major and Major Groups. Section 6 gives
a description of each of the groups distinguished and lists job tasks which persons classified
to the group typically carry out and common job titles which are classified to the group.

Volume 2 mainly consists of a detailed alphabetical index of job titles, giving both the
SOC90 and SOC2000 Unit Group to which each is assigned. This is designed for use in
coding occupations. To assist consistent coding some guidance notes are provided on the
way in which the index has been compiled and organised and on how to locate exactly the
right index entry, given the kind of description of the job typically provided by informants.
These notes form the introductory sections to Volume 2.


3.         Principles and concepts

3.1        Types of economic activity classification

In classifying jobs and persons by reference to their economic activity four distinct concepts
are generally recognised and separately measured in standard statistical sources. These
are:

      1.    Economic activity status
      2.    Occupation
      3.    Status in employment
      4.    Industry

Economic activity status defines whether the person is or is not at some reference time a
member of the workforce. In practice those in paid employment and those currently looking
for or available for paid employment are classified as economically active and the remainder
as economically inactive. Many economically inactive persons (e.g. most of those wholly
retired from employment) have, of course, had an occupation at some time in the past.

Occupation is most often determined by reference to a person’s main job at the reference
time, but for persons not currently employed may be determined by reference to the most
recent, or most recent main, job. The SOC principles used in classifying occupations are
discussed below.

Status in employment refers to the relationship of a person doing a job to the means of
production (i.e. proprietor or self-employed versus employee); and, for an employee, to
his or her position in the seniority structure of the workplace (e.g. apprentice/trainee,
foreman/supervisor, manager, other employee). Not all these status distinctions are made
in every data source and there have been differences over time and between different




                                                   Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   3
Introduction



               classificatory schemes as to whether certain distinctions should be built into the classification
               of occupations or introduced separately.

               Industry refers to the economic sector to which the work done in a particular job contributes.
               It is usually defined by reference to the main product made or service performed at the
               workplace at or from which a job is carried on. Thus the job of a person who is
               occupationally a carpenter will be classified industrially to building, if employed by a
               building firm, but to brewing, if employed by a brewing firm. Most occupational groups
               include jobs located in many different industrial sectors; but there are some cases of
               occupations which in practice are associated almost entirely with one particular industry.
               In general, classification of occupations to SOC takes no account of information on industry,
               but for certain exceptions to this see the Notes on coding included in Volume 2 of the SOC
               Manual.

               3.2     Objects to be classified and criteria of classification

               SOC is designed as a classification applicable to all paid jobs performed by economically
               active persons in the United Kingdom. Defined as a set of tasks or duties to be carried out
               by one person, the notion of a job represents a basic element in the employment relationship.
               Jobs are usually structured by employers (or by the worker in the case of self-employment)
               and others, including professional bodies, employer and/or worker organisations and
               governments, may regulate their definition. Jobs are recognised primarily by the associated
               job title. They are classified into groups according to the concept of ‘skill level’ and ‘skill
               specialisation’. As in SOC90, skill level is defined with respect to the

                                  ‘…duration of training and/or work experience recognised in
                                  the field of employment concerned as being normally required
                                  to pursue the occupation competently’.
                                  (Employment Department Group/Office of Population
                                  Censuses and Surveys, 1990)

               Skill specialisation is defined as the field of knowledge required for competent, thorough
               and efficient conduct of the tasks. In some areas of the classification it refers also to the
               type of work performed (e.g. materials worked with, tools used, etc.).

               Skill levels are approximated by the length of time deemed necessary for a person to become
               fully competent in the performance of the tasks associated with a job. This, in turn, is a
               function of the time taken to gain necessary formal qualifications or the required amount
               of work-based training. Apart from formal training and qualifications, some tasks require
               varying types of experience, possibly in other tasks, for competence to be acquired. Within
               the broad structure of the classification (major groups and sub-major groups)7 reference
               can be made to these four skill levels.

               7
                   In common with the 1988 International Standard Classification of Occupations (ILO, 1990), SOC90 and SOC2000 utilise four
                   levels of aggregation within the classification. These are termed major groups, sub-major groups, minor groups and unit
                   groups. In SOC2000, as in ISCO-88, these are represented numerically by one, two, three or four digits.




               4       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                           Introduction
      The first skill level equates with the competence associated with a general education,
      usually acquired by the time a person completes his/her compulsory education and
      signalled via a satisfactory set of school-leaving examination grades. Competent
      performance of jobs classified at this level will also involve knowledge of appropriate
      health and safety regulations and may require short periods of work-related training.
      Examples of occupations defined at this skill level within the SOC90 include postal
      workers, hotel porters, cleaners and catering assistants.

      The second skill level covers a large group of occupations, all of which require the
      knowledge provided via a good general education as for occupations at the first skill
      level, but which typically have a longer period of work-related training or work
      experience. Occupations classified at this level include machine operation, driving,
      caring occupations, retailing, and clerical and secretarial occupations.

      The third skill level applies to occupations that normally require a body of knowledge
      associated with a period of post-compulsory education but not to degree level. A
      number of technical occupations fall into this category, as do a variety of trades
      occupations and proprietors of small businesses. In the latter case, educational
      qualifications at sub-degree level or a lengthy period of vocational training may not
      be a necessary prerequisite for competent performance of tasks, but a significant
      period of work experience is typical.

      The fourth skill level relates to what are termed ‘professional’ occupations and
      managerial positions in corporate enterprises or national/local government.
      Occupations at this level normally require a degree or equivalent period of relevant
      work experience.

Table 1 lists the sub-major groups of SOC2000 and compares these with SOC90. As can
be seen from the names of these sub-major groups, the skill specialisation criterion has
been used to distinguish groups of occupations within each skill level. Thus, for example,
health professionals are distinguished from science and technology professionals and skilled
metal and electrical trades from skilled construction and building trades.




                                                  Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   5
Introduction



               Table 1:          Skill levels and the sub-major group structure of SOC2000 and SOC90

                   Skill          Sub-major groups of:
                   level

                                  SOC2000                                          SOC90
                Level 4     11    Corporate managers                          1a   Corporate managers and administrators
                            21    Science and technology professionals        2a   Science and engineering professionals
                            22    Health professionals                        2b   Health professionals
                            23    Teaching and research professionals         2c   Teaching professionals
                            24    Business and public service professionals   2d   Other professional occupations

                Level 3     12 Managers and proprietors in agriculture        1b Managers/proprietors in agriculture
                                  and services                                      and services
                            31 Science and technology associate               3a Science and engineering
                                  professionals                                     associate professionals
                            32 Health and social welfare associate            3b Health associate professionals
                                   professionals
                            33 Protective service occupations                 6a Protective service occupations
                            34 Culture, media and sports occupations          3c Other associate professional
                                                                                    occupations
                            35    Business and public service associate       7a Buyers, brokers and sales
                                     professionals                                  representatives
                            51    Skilled agricultural trades                 9a Other occupations in agriculture,
                                                                                    forestry and fishing
                            52    Skilled metal and electrical trades         5b Skilled engineering trades
                            53    Skilled construction and building trades 5a Skilled construction trades
                            54    Textiles, printing and other skilled trades 5c Other skilled trades

                Level 2     41 Administrative occupations                     4a Clerical occupations
                            42 Secretarial and related occupations            4b Secretarial occupations
                            61 Caring personal service occupations            6b Personal service occupations
                            62 Leisure and other personal service
                                  occupations
                            71 Sales occupations                              7b Other sales occupations
                            72 Customer service occupations
                            81 Process, plant and machine operatives          8a Industrial plant and machine
                                                                                    operators, assemblers
                            82 Transport and mobile machine drivers           8b Drivers and mobile machine
                                  and operatives                                    operators

                Level 1     91 Elementary trades, plant and storage           9b Other elementary occupations
                                  related occupations
                            92 Elementary administration and service
                                  occupations

               Note: Sub-major groups of SOC90 have been listed in the order which best approximates their equivalent
                     position in SOC2000. It must be stressed however that there is no exact correspondence at this level.




               6       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                                       Introduction
Two of the new features of SOC2000 are also apparent from Table 1. First, it can be seen
that the sub-major group structure of SOC2000 is incorporated within the codes used to
describe the classification. The first two digits of the SOC2000 define the major and the
sub-major groups of the classification. This was not the case with SOC90. For this reason,
four digits are now required to describe the full code structure of SOC2000, as opposed to
the 3-digit structure of SOC90. Secondly, the sub-major group structure of SOC2000 now
follows a more regular pattern within the classification. This has been achieved by
repositioning certain sub-major groups within the major group structure according to the
skill level criterion.

3.3     The revision of SOC90

From consideration of comments received from users of SOC90, as well as from the work
undertaken in the Review of Social Classifications and the harmonisation activities
conducted for Eurostat, work on the development of SOC2000 was focused in a number
of areas. These were:
        Computing and related occupations
        Whilst nearly all jobs have been affected in some way by the rapid progress in
        information and communication technologies, at the forefront of these are the jobs
        which relate directly to the design and implementation of such technologies. It seemed
        crucial that this area should be overhauled thoroughly.
        Managerial occupations
        For a variety of reasons, this area was in need of reform. The apparent inconsistency
        in definition of managerial occupations compared with practice in other EU countries
        was reason enough for this decision. However, other strands of research evidence
        pointed to forces such as ‘de-layering’ of management structures in organisations
        and to a potential ‘inflation’ of the use of the title ‘manager’ in jobs which should not
        be regarded as managerial8.
        Conservation/environmental occupations
        Shifting tastes and preferences have led to an increasing demand for environmental
        protection and conservation. SOC90 did not recognise many specific occupations
        related to these activities within its structure. During consultations undertaken in
        the development process, a number of users had expressed particular concern over
        this apparent omission.
        Skill upgrading/de-skilling within manufacturing processes
        Two sets of forces appear to underlie change in occupations that are associated
        primarily with the manufacturing process. The continued development of



8
    A good example of this is the now frequent use of the title ‘train manager’ for the job known earlier as ‘senior conductor’.




                                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1         7
Introduction



                     manufacturing systems which move away from mass production to small batch,
                     customised production may have stimulated the demand for technically qualified
                     occupations in production, to facilitate rapid re-tooling and other adjustments to the
                     equipment used. Simultaneously, the widespread use of computerised production
                     and control methods may have lessened the need for workers to hold the specialised
                     skills in many traditional craft occupations.
                     Customer service occupations
                     Shifts in consumer tastes and preferences towards a more ‘self-service’ approach,
                     associated with the wider availability of competitively-priced alternative goods and
                     services, have stimulated the demand for and supply of after-sales service, quality
                     testing and assurance and customer ‘loyalty’ schemes to attract and maintain
                     customers. These developments appear to have given rise to a new set of occupations
                     in which the associated tasks lie at the interface between the producers or distributors
                     and the consumers of goods and services.
                     Remote service provision
                     Development in information and communication technologies has facilitated the
                     demand for the provision of services outside ‘normal’ business hours and has
                     stimulated the development of service provision from remote call centres. Part of
                     the growth in such demand may be due to latent demand and some may be a function
                     of increased female labour force participation. The latter trend may have resulted in
                     a reduction in the availability of one household member to: shop, pay bills, or receive
                     services related to telephone, electricity, gas, water, etc. during ‘normal’ business
                     hours. While web-based commercial and informational communications or
                     transactions may yet supersede these changes,the rapid growth in this area combined
                     with the scale of employment change suggested the need for specific occupational
                     categories to identify occupations in this area of work.
               Sources of information about the terminology of occupations and the work content of jobs
               were available in a variety of sources and formats for the revision of SOC90. By far the
               most useful sources were derived from the Census of Population and the Labour Force
               Survey. While the 1991 Census of Population is now somewhat dated, its information was
               valuable in determining how well SOC90 was operationalised and gave useful information
               on the quality of occupational detail obtained from census form-fillers.

               The main source available from the 1991 Census of Population was a ½% sample of
               individual records for England and Wales. The text response to questions on occupation,
               industry and post-schooling qualifications was extracted from approximately 115 thousand
               census records and placed into a searchable database. Similar information was extracted
               from the 1996/97 Labour Force Survey, covering 63 thousand jobs and consisting of details
               such as the job title, main tasks performed in the job and qualifications required for the job.
               Other sources of information on occupational descriptions were obtained via the
               Employment Service, which generated a database of 291 thousand detailed descriptions of
               job vacancies, all coded to SOC90.




               8    Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                            Introduction
The Employment Service (ES) was keen to ensure that its interests in occupational
classification for job matching purposes were adequately reflected in the new classification.
To this end, the ES commissioned the IER to undertake a programme of research that
would run parallel to the ONS-led revision of SOC90. This took the form of a review of
the process of job matching and the role played by SOC90 in this process. Through a
series of visits to Job Centres and via the collection of relevant information from a survey
of approximately 80 Job Centres, further information was gained about the requirements
of the ES and the way in which these might be reflected in the revision process.

Other sources of information, which proved useful in investigating processes of skill change
and to illuminate the definition skill levels, were:

      • the ‘371 database’ – an electronic encyclopaedia of statistical information structured
        around the 371 unit groups of SOC90 (McKnight and Elias, 1997);

      • a database of queries collected over an eight year period from agencies using
        SOC90 for coding occupational information;

      • recently published material containing detailed descriptions of a wide variety of
        jobs (trade journals, newspaper advertising for job vacancies, careers guidance
        materials);

      • correspondence from interested parties, including trades unions, trade associations,
        employers, employer associations and government departments;

      • information arising from the detailed scrutiny of SOC90 unit groups by the team
        developing the new Social Classification for the UK.

These sources gave much valuable information about the problem areas of the SOC and
yielded a ‘test-bed’ of data for experimentation with the construction of new occupational
categories.

3.4   The structure of SOC2000

This section presents a brief summary of some of the major changes that distinguish
SOC2000 from SOC90.

Major Group 1 (Managers and senior officials)

The change of the name of this major group, from managers and administrators to managers
and senior officials reflects the substantial revision that has been made to this major group.
Many job titles that were indicative of high level clerical work (e.g. administrative assistant)
are now repositioned in major group 4.

New minor and unit groups are now included for quality and customer care managers, and
in the area of Health and Social services. A new unit group exists for natural environment
and conservation managers. In the area of hospitality and leisure services, new unit groups




                                                   Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   9
Introduction



               exist for conference and exhibition managers, leisure and sports managers and travel
               agency managers. In other service sector areas, managers and proprietors of small retail
               establishments are defined more clearly, and a new unit group exists for recycling and
               refuse disposal managers.

               Major Group 2 (Professional occupations)

               In major group 2 new unit groups for information and communication technology
               professionals have been created. IT strategy and planning professionals are shown as
               distinct from software professionals. All software and programming occupations, which
               involve a high level of knowledge of software, networking and the software/hardware
               interaction, are now classified to major group 2. Previously these were mainly classified
               to major group 3. These decisions also reflect advice and guidance received from industry
               training bodies in this area.

               Research professionals are now identified according to the type of research they perform.
               A new unit group was also created to capture those occupations in the public service which
               are essentially administrative in nature, but which require a degree or equivalent level of
               experience for competent performance.

               Major Group 3 (Associate professional and technical occupations)

               In major group 3 new unit groups that have been created to classify IT service delivery
               occupations. These are jobs that involve a technical knowledge of IT operations or provide
               technical support to users. A new category is shown for paramedics and for medical and
               dental technicians. Social welfare associate professionals now distinguish youth and
               community workers separately from housing and welfare officers. A separate minor group
               was created for therapists, including unit groups for physiotherapists, occupational
               therapists and speech and language therapists.

               A significant effort was made to develop a better treatment for a large and growing group
               of occupations in the arts, literature, media, sports and fitness. Three minor groups and
               fourteen unit groups are now used to classify occupations in this area. In the area of
               business and finance, a new structure was introduced, following our decision to move
               brokers from major group 7 to major group 3. New unit groups are included for conservation
               associate professional occupations.

               A new minor group was created to facilitate repositioning of a number of unit groups from
               within the SOC90 sub-major group, protective service occupations. These include the
               armed forces, police officers, fire service officers and prison service officers.

               Major Group 4 (Administrative and secretarial occupations)

               Major group 4 now classifies a number of administrative occupations that were previously
               placed in major group 1. New minor groups were created for administrative occupations
               in government and related areas, finance, records, communications and for general clerical
               occupations.




               10    Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                          Introduction
Major Group 5 (Skilled trades occupations)

Farmers have been relocated here from major group 1 and skilled farm workers from major
group 9.

Major Group 6 (Personal service occupations)

New occupational areas have been defined in major group 6 for childcare and related
personal occupations and for leisure and travel service occupations.

Major Group 7 (Sales and customer service occupations)

In major group 7 a new minor group has been created to classify customer service
occupations.

Major Group 8 (Process, plant and machine operatives)

A particular concern here was to reduce the number of unit groups in this major group,
many that were no longer large enough for statistical purposes due to the decline in this
area of the occupational structure of employment.

Major Group 9 (Elementary occupations)

This major group now includes a significant number of unit groups that have been
repositioned here from other major groups in SOC90. Particular attention is drawn to the
repositioning of bar staff and waiters and waitresses from major group 6 to this major
group. A new minor group has been created for what we term elementary security
occupations.

3.5   Structure of the classification

The major group structure is a set of broad occupational categories which are designed to
be useful in bringing together unit groups which are similar in terms of the qualifications,
training, skills and experience commonly associated with the competent performance of
work tasks. The divisions between major groups also reflect the important aim of aligning
SOC as far as possible with the international classification ISCO 88, in which major groups
are distinguished on similar criteria.

SOC90 had nine major groups, 22 sub-major groups, 77 minor groups and 371 unit groups.
SOC2000 has nine major groups, 25 sub-major groups, 81 minor groups and 353 unit
groups.

Table 2 shows the nine major groups of SOC, defined in terms of the general nature of the
qualifications, training and experience associated with competent performance of tasks in
the occupations classified within each major group.




                                                Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   11
Introduction


                                    Table 2:          General Nature of Qualifications, Training and
                                                      Experience for Occupations in SOC Major Groups


               Major Group                       General Nature of Qualifications, Training and
                                                 Experience for Occupations in the Major Group


               Managers and                      A significant amount of knowledge and experience of the production processes
                 Senior Officials                and service requirements associated with the efficient functioning of
                                                 organisations and businesses.

               Professional                      A degree or equivalent qualification, with some occupations requiring
                  Occupations                    postgraduate qualifications and/or a formal period of experience-related
                                                 training.

               Associate Professional            An associated high-level vocational qualification, often involving a
                  and Technical                  substantial period of full-time training or further study. Some additional task-
                  Occupations                    related training is usually provided through a formal period of induction.

               Administrative and                A good standard of general education. Certain occupations will require
                 Secretarial                     further additional vocational training to a well defined standard (e.g. typing
                 Occupations                     or shorthand).

               Skilled Trades                    A substantial period of training, often provided by means of a work-
                   Occupations                   based training programme.

               Personal Service                  A good standard of general education. Certain occupations will require further
                  Occupations                    additional vocational training, often provided by means of a work-based
                                                 training programme.

               Sales and Customer                A general education and a programme of work-based training related to sales
               Service Occupations               procedures. Some occupations require additional specific technical knowledge
                                                 but are included in this major group because the primary task involves selling.

               Process, Plant and                The knowledge and experience necessary to operate vehicles and other mobile
                  Machine Operatives             and stationary machinery, to operate and monitor industrial plant and
                                                 equipment, to assemble products from component parts according to strict
                                                 rules and procedures and subject assembled parts to routine tests. Most
                                                 occupations in this major group will specify a minimum standard of
                                                 competence that must be attained for satisfactory performance of the associated
                                                 tasks and will have an associated period of formal experience-related training.

               Elementary Occupations            Occupations classified at this level will usually require a minimum general
                                                 level of education (i.e. that which is provided by the end of the period of
                                                 compulsory education). Some occupations at this level will also have short
                                                 periods of work-related training in areas such as health and safety, food
                                                 hygiene, and customer service requirements.




               12     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                                   Introduction
3.6     The impact of reclassification

To gain some indication of the potential impact of these and a wide variety of other changes
on the definition of occupational structure, the Occupation Information Unit reclassified a
½% sample of the 1991 Census of Population for England and Wales which was originally
coded to SOC90. While this is a guide to the potential impact of SOC2000 in terms of the
measurement of occupational structure, these comparisons must be treated with a degree
of caution. The most obvious point to make is that the Census took place almost a decade
ago. Many of the new categories in SOC2000 may now be populated quite differently.
Furthermore, the process of reclassifying data is different from the process of coding. The
former involves much expert judgement and discussion. The latter is a more routine process
that, by its nature, is error prone. To address these issues, a single quarter of the Labour
Force Survey (Winter 1996/7) was re-coded. The coding procedures adopted were somewhat
different from the original9 and the coding to SOC2000 unit groups was performed without
reference to the original SOC90 unit group codes.

Figures 1 and 2 show, for males and females separately, changes in the occupational structure
of employment in England and Wales between 1991 and 1996/7, with employment classified
to the major group structure of SOC90 and SOC2000. In both of these charts four
overlapping bars are shown for each major group, indicating the percentage of total
employment in the major group. The two bars placed furthest back show the occupational
structure as recorded in 1991, by SOC90 then by SOC2000. The two bars to the front of
each group reveal how these percentages have changed by Winter 1996/7.

There are a number of areas where the move to SOC2000 will have a marked impact upon
the perception of the occupational structure of employment. In major group 1 (Managers
and Senior Officials) the tightening of the definition of managers reduces the size of this
category significantly, especially for females (4 per cent reduction for females and 2 per
cent reduction for males). Major group 3 (Associate Professional and Technical
Occupations) increases in size, more so for men than for women. Major group 4
(Administrative and Secretarial Occupations) declines significantly for males and slightly
for females. Major group 6 (Personal Service Occupations) declines sharply for males, by
almost three-quarters, and by about a quarter for females. The shift of waiters, waitresses
and bar staff to major group 9 (Elementary Occupations) has a marked effect upon the size
of this major group, which rises from 8 per cent of male employment to over 12 per cent
and from 9 per cent of female employment to over 16 per cent.

The effect of moving from SOC90 to SOC2000 is almost identical when comparing the
1991 Census data with the Winter 1996/7 quarter of the Labour Force Survey. Although
changes in occupational structure are apparent between 1991 and 1996/7, notably the decline
in skilled trades occupations for males and the decline in administrative, clerical and
secretarial occupations for females, the relative effect of moving from the old to the new
classification remains the same for each period. There is one exception however. For

9
    The Labour Force Survey is coded by interviewers upon completion of a batch of interviews. The recoding of this same data to
    SOC2000 was undertaken by a small centralised team of office coders.




                                                                   Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1        13
Introduction



               females, SOC90 appeared to indicate a slight decline in the proportion of employment
               classified to Major group 1 (Managers and Senior Officials) between 1991 and 1996/7.
               Redefinition of this group to exclude administrative occupations reveals some underlying
               growth in the more narrowly defined managerial category.




               14    Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                           Introduction
4.       Updating of SOC

Changes occur in work organisation as a result of technological developments, use of new
materials, improved methods of production or delivery of services etc. New occupations
arise either because tasks are enlarged, contracted or combined within and between existing
occupations or because new, different tasks are introduced into the organisation of work.
Such new occupations may become sufficiently important to warrant their recognition and
inclusion in the classification. Additionally, new index entries for Volume 2 may be required.

The Occupational Information Unit, of the Office for National Statistics, set up to support
SOC, would welcome information on such changes. This will be taken into account in the
periodical updating of SOC. For SOC90 we published an updated edition of Volume 2 in
1995. For SOC2000 we are considering the production of more frequent updates to the
index, not in printed form, but to the index file held electronically.

Please contact:

     Occupational Information Unit
     Office for National Statistics
     Segensworth Road
     Titchfield
     Fareham
     Hampshire
     PO15 5RR

     Telephone 01329 813640
     Facsimile 01329 813532
     Email occupation.information@ons.gov.uk

For all other statistical enquiries:

     Telephone 020 7533 5888
     Email info@ons.gov.uk




                                                 Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   17
Introduction



               References

               Elias, P. (1996). Occupational classification (ISCO88): concepts, methods, reliability
                  validity and cross-national comparability. OECD working paper DEELSA/ELSA/
                  WP7(96)7. Paris: OECD.

               Elias, P. (1997). ‘Social Class and the Standard Occupational Classification’. Chapter 2 in
                  Rose, D, and K. O’Reilly (eds.).

               Employment Department Group/Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (1990).
                 Standard Occupational Classification. Volume 1. London: HMSO.

               International Labour Office (1990). International Standard Classification of Occupations,
                  ISCO-88. Geneva, International Labour Office.

               McKnight, A. and P. Elias (1997). ‘A database of information on unit groups of the Standard
                 Occupational Classification’. Chapter 9 in D. Rose and K. O’Reilly (eds.) Constructing
                 Classes: towards a new social classification for the UK. Swindon: ESRC/ONS.

               Rose, D. and O’Reilly, K. (eds.) (1997). Constructing Classes: towards a new social
                 classification for theUK. Swindon: ESRC/ONS.

               Rose, D. and K. O’Reilly (eds.) (1998). Final report of the ESRC Review of Government
                 Social Classifications. Swindon: ESRC.




               18    Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                         Summary of Structure
            Standard Occupational Classification 2000 (SOC2000)
                          Summary of Structure

The Standard Occupational Classification consists of the following major groups:


        1      Managers and Senior Officials
        2      Professional Occupations
        3      Associate Professional and Technical Occupations
        4      Administrative and Secretarial Occupations
        5      Skilled Trades Occupations
        6      Personal Service Occupations
        7      Sales and Customer Service Occupations
        8      Process, Plant and Machine Operatives
        9      Elementary Occupations


The sub-major, minor group and unit group structure of these major groups is defined as
follows:




                                               Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   19
                                                                                                     Summary of Structure
         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 (SOC2000)
                       Summary of Structure


Major   Sub-Major   Minor   Unit    Group Title
Group   Group       Group   Group

1                                   MANAGERS AND SENIOR OFFICIALS

        11                          CORPORATE MANAGERS

                    111             Corporate Managers And Senior Officials

                            1111    Senior officials in national government
                            1112    Directors and chief executives of major organisations
                            1113    Senior officials in local government
                            1114    Senior officials of special interest organisations

                    112             Production Managers

                            1121    Production, works and maintenance managers
                            1122    Managers in construction
                            1123    Managers in mining and energy

                    113             Functional Managers

                            1131    Financial managers and chartered secretaries
                            1132    Marketing and sales managers
                            1133    Purchasing managers
                            1134    Advertising and public relations managers
                            1135    Personnel, training and industrial relations managers
                            1136    Information and communication technology managers
                            1137    Research and development managers

                    114             Quality And Customer Care Managers

                            1141    Quality assurance managers
                            1142    Customer care managers

                    115             Financial Institution And Office Managers

                            1151    Financial institution managers
                            1152    Office managers

                    116             Managers In Distribution, Storage And Retailing

                            1161    Transport and distribution managers
                            1162    Storage and warehouse managers
                            1163    Retail and wholesale managers




                                           Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   21
                       Major      Sub-Major         Minor        Unit         Group Title
Summary of Structure



                       Group      Group             Group        Group

                                                    117                       Protective Service Officers

                                                                 1171         Officers in armed forces
                                                                 1172         Police officers (inspectors and above)
                                                                 1173         Senior officers in fire, ambulance, prison and related
                                                                              services
                                                                 1174         Security managers

                                                    118                       Health And Social Services Managers

                                                                 1181         Hospital and health service managers
                                                                 1182         Pharmacy managers
                                                                 1183         Healthcare practice managers
                                                                 1184         Social services managers
                                                                 1185         Residential and day care managers

                                  12                                          MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN
                                                                              AGRICULTURE AND SERVICES

                                                    121                       Managers In Farming, Horticulture, Forestry And
                                                                              Fishing

                                                                 1211         Farm managers
                                                                 1212         Natural environment and conservation managers
                                                                 1219         Managers in animal husbandry, forestry and fishing n.e.c.

                                                    122                       Managers And Proprietors In Hospitality And Leisure
                                                                              Services

                                                                 1221         Hotel and accommodation managers
                                                                 1222         Conference and exhibition managers
                                                                 1223         Restaurant and catering managers
                                                                 1224         Publicans and managers of licensed premises
                                                                 1225         Leisure and sports managers
                                                                 1226         Travel agency managers

                                                    123                       Managers And Proprietors In Other Service
                                                                              Industries

                                                                 1231         Property, housing and land managers
                                                                 1232         Garage managers and proprietors
                                                                 1233         Hairdressing and beauty salon managers and proprietors
                                                                 1234         Shopkeepers and wholesale/retail dealers
                                                                 1235         Recycling and refuse disposal managers
                                                                 1239         Managers and proprietors in other services n.e.c.




                       22      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                     Summary of Structure
Major   Sub-Major   Minor   Unit    Group Title
Group   Group       Group   Group

2                                   PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATIONS

        21                          SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROFESSIONALS

                    211             Science Professionals

                            2111    Chemists
                            2112    Biological scientists and biochemists
                            2113    Physicists, geologists and meteorologists

                    212             Engineering Professionals

                            2121    Civil engineers
                            2122    Mechanical engineers
                            2123    Electrical engineers
                            2124    Electronics engineers
                            2125    Chemical engineers
                            2126    Design and development engineers
                            2127    Production and process engineers
                            2128    Planning and quality control engineers
                            2129    Engineering professionals n.e.c.

                    213             Information And Communication Technology
                                    Professionals

                            2131    IT strategy and planning professionals
                            2132    Software professionals

        22                          HEALTH PROFESSIONALS

                    221             Health Professionals

                            2211    Medical practitioners
                            2212    Psychologists
                            2213    Pharmacists/pharmacologists
                            2214    Ophthalmic opticians
                            2215    Dental practitioners
                            2216    Veterinarians

        23                          TEACHING AND RESEARCH PROFESSIONALS

                    231             Teaching Professionals

                            2311    Higher education teaching professionals
                            2312    Further education teaching professionals
                            2313    Education officers, school inspectors
                            2314    Secondary education teaching professionals
                            2315    Primary and nursery education teaching professionals
                            2316    Special needs education teaching professionals
                            2317    Registrars and senior administrators of educational
                                    establishments
                            2319    Teaching professionals n.e.c.




                                           Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   23
                       Major      Sub-Major         Minor        Unit         Group Title
Summary of Structure



                       Group      Group             Group        Group

                                                    232                       Research Professionals

                                                                 2321         Scientific researchers
                                                                 2322         Social science researchers
                                                                 2329         Researchers n.e.c.

                                  24                                          BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE
                                                                              PROFESSIONALS

                                                    241                       Legal Professionals

                                                                 2411         Solicitors and lawyers, judges and coroners
                                                                 2419         Legal professionals n.e.c.

                                                    242                       Business And Statistical Professionals

                                                                 2421         Chartered and certified accountants
                                                                 2422         Management accountants
                                                                 2423         Management consultants, actuaries, economists and
                                                                              statisticians

                                                    243                       Architects, Town Planners, Surveyors

                                                                 2431         Architects
                                                                 2432         Town planners
                                                                 2433         Quantity surveyors
                                                                 2434         Chartered surveyors (not quantity surveyors)

                                                    244                       Public Service Professionals

                                                                 2441         Public service administrative professionals
                                                                 2442         Social workers
                                                                 2443         Probation officers
                                                                 2444         Clergy

                                                    245                       Librarians And Related Professionals
                                                                 2451         Librarians
                                                                 2452         Archivists and curators




                       24      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                     Summary of Structure
Major   Sub-Major   Minor   Unit    Group Title
Group   Group       Group   Group

3                                   ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL
                                    OCCUPATIONS

        31                          SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATE
                                    PROFESSIONALS

                    311             Science And Engineering Technicians

                            3111    Laboratory technicians
                            3112    Electrical/electronics technicians
                            3113    Engineering technicians
                            3114    Building and civil engineering technicians
                            3115    Quality assurance technicians
                            3119    Science and engineering technicians n.e.c.

                    312             Draughtspersons And Building Inspectors

                            3121    Architectural technologists and town planning technicians
                            3122    Draughtspersons
                            3123    Building inspectors

                    313             IT Service Delivery Occupations

                            3131    IT operations technicians
                            3132    IT user support technicians

        32                          HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE ASSOCIATE
                                    PROFESSIONALS

                    321             Health Associate Professionals

                            3211    Nurses
                            3212    Midwives
                            3213    Paramedics
                            3214    Medical radiographers
                            3215    Chiropodists
                            3216    Dispensing opticians
                            3217    Pharmaceutical dispensers
                            3218    Medical and dental technicians

                    322             Therapists

                            3221    Physiotherapists
                            3222    Occupational therapists
                            3223    Speech and language therapists
                            3229    Therapists n.e.c.

                    323             Social Welfare Associate Professionals

                            3231    Youth and community workers
                            3232    Housing and welfare officers




                                           Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   25
                       Major      Sub-Major         Minor        Unit         Group Title
Summary of Structure



                       Group      Group             Group        Group

                                  33                                          PROTECTIVE SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

                                                    331                       Protective Service Occupations

                                                                 3311         NCOs and other ranks
                                                                 3312         Police officers (sergeant and below)
                                                                 3313         Fire service officers (leading fire officer and below)
                                                                 3314         Prison service officers (below principal officer)
                                                                 3319         Protective service associate professionals n.e.c.

                                  34                                          CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORTS OCCUPATIONS

                                                    341                       Artistic And Literary Occupations

                                                                 3411         Artists
                                                                 3412         Authors, writers
                                                                 3413         Actors, entertainers
                                                                 3414         Dancers and choreographers
                                                                 3415         Musicians
                                                                 3416         Arts officers, producers and directors

                                                    342                       Design Associate Professionals

                                                                 3421         Graphic designers
                                                                 3422         Product, clothing and related designers

                                                    343                       Media Associate Professionals

                                                                 3431         Journalists, newspaper and periodical editors
                                                                 3432         Broadcasting associate professionals
                                                                 3433         Public relations officers
                                                                 3434         Photographers and audio-visual equipment operators

                                                    344                       Sports And Fitness Occupations

                                                                 3441         Sports players
                                                                 3442         Sports coaches, instructors and officials
                                                                 3443         Fitness instructors
                                                                 3449         Sports and fitness occupations n.e.c.

                                  35                                          BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATE
                                                                              PROFESSIONALS

                                                    351                       Transport Associate Professionals

                                                                 3511         Air traffic controllers
                                                                 3512         Aircraft pilots and flight engineers
                                                                 3513         Ship and hovercraft officers
                                                                 3514         Train drivers




                       26      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                      Summary of Structure
Major   Sub-Major   Minor   Unit    Group Title
Group   Group       Group   Group

                    352             Legal Associate Professionals

                            3520    Legal associate professionals

                    353             Business And Finance Associate Professionals

                            3531    Estimators, valuers and assessors
                            3532    Brokers
                            3533    Insurance underwriters
                            3534    Finance and investment analysts/advisers
                            3535    Taxation experts
                            3536    Importers, exporters
                            3537    Financial and accounting technicians
                            3539    Business and related associate professionals n.e.c.

                    354             Sales And Related Associate Professionals

                            3541    Buyers and purchasing officers
                            3542    Sales representatives
                            3543    Marketing associate professionals
                            3544    Estate agents, auctioneers

                    355             Conservation Associate Professionals

                            3551    Conservation and environmental protection officers
                            3552    Countryside and park rangers

                    356             Public Service And Other Associate Professionals

                            3561    Public service associate professionals
                            3562    Personnel and industrial relations officers
                            3563    Vocational and industrial trainers and instructors
                            3564    Careers advisers and vocational guidance specialists
                            3565    Inspectors of factories, utilities and trading standards
                            3566    Statutory examiners
                            3567    Occupational hygienists and safety officers (health and
                                    safety)
                            3568    Environmental health officers




                                            Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   27
                       Major      Sub-Major         Minor        Unit         Group Title
Summary of Structure



                       Group      Group             Group        Group

                       4                                                      ADMINISTRATIVE AND SECRETARIAL
                                                                              OCCUPATIONS

                                  41                                          ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS

                                                    411                       Administrative Occupations: Government And
                                                                              Related Organisations

                                                                 4111         Civil Service executive officers
                                                                 4112         Civil Service administrative officers and assistants
                                                                 4113         Local government clerical officers and assistants
                                                                 4114         Officers of non-governmental organisations

                                                    412                       Administrative Occupations: Finance

                                                                 4121         Credit controllers
                                                                 4122         Accounts and wages clerks, book-keepers, other financial
                                                                              clerks
                                                                 4123         Counter clerks

                                                    413                       Administrative Occupations: Records

                                                                 4131         Filing and other records assistants/clerks
                                                                 4132         Pensions and insurance clerks
                                                                 4133         Stock control clerks
                                                                 4134         Transport and distribution clerks
                                                                 4135         Library assistants/clerks
                                                                 4136         Database assistants/clerks
                                                                 4137         Market research interviewers

                                                    414                       Administrative Occupations: Communications

                                                                 4141         Telephonists
                                                                 4142         Communication operators

                                                    415                       Administrative Occupations: General

                                                                 4150         General office assistants/clerks

                                  42                                          SECRETARIAL AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS


                                                    421                       Secretarial And Related Occupations

                                                                 4211         Medical secretaries
                                                                 4212         Legal secretaries
                                                                 4213         School secretaries
                                                                 4214         Company secretaries
                                                                 4215         Personal assistants and other secretaries
                                                                 4216         Receptionists
                                                                 4217         Typists




                       28      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                      Summary of Structure
Major   Sub-Major   Minor   Unit    Group Title
Group   Group       Group   Group

5                                   SKILLED TRADES OCCUPATIONS

        51                          SKILLED AGRICULTURAL TRADES

                    511             Agricultural Trades

                            5111    Farmers
                            5112    Horticultural trades
                            5113    Gardeners and groundsmen/groundswomen
                            5119    Agricultural and fishing trades n.e.c.

        52                          SKILLED METAL AND ELECTRICAL TRADES

                    521             Metal Forming, Welding And Related Trades

                            5211    Smiths and forge workers
                            5212    Moulders, core makers, die casters
                            5213    Sheet metal workers
                            5214    Metal plate workers, shipwrights, riveters
                            5215    Welding trades
                            5216    Pipe fitters

                    522             Metal Machining, Fitting And Instrument Making
                                    Trades

                            5221    Metal machining setters and setter-operators
                            5222    Tool makers, tool fitters and markers-out
                            5223    Metal working production and maintenance fitters
                            5224    Precision instrument makers and repairers

                    523             Vehicle Trades

                            5231    Motor mechanics, auto engineers
                            5232    Vehicle body builders and repairers
                            5233    Auto electricians
                            5234    Vehicle spray painters

                    524             Electrical Trades

                            5241    Electricians, electrical fitters
                            5242    Telecommunications engineers
                            5243    Lines repairers and cable jointers
                            5244    TV, video and audio engineers
                            5245    Computer engineers, installation and maintenance
                            5249    Electrical/electronics engineers n.e.c.




                                            Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   29
                       Major      Sub-Major         Minor        Unit         Group Title
Summary of Structure



                       Group      Group             Group        Group

                                  53                                          SKILLED CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING
                                                                              TRADES

                                                    531                       Construction Trades

                                                                 5311         Steel erectors
                                                                 5312         Bricklayers, masons
                                                                 5313         Roofers, roof tilers and slaters
                                                                 5314         Plumbers, heating and ventilating engineers
                                                                 5315         Carpenters and joiners
                                                                 5316         Glaziers, window fabricators and fitters
                                                                 5319         Construction trades n.e.c.

                                                    532                       Building Trades

                                                                 5321         Plasterers
                                                                 5322         Floorers and wall tilers
                                                                 5323         Painters and decorators

                                  54                                          TEXTILES, PRINTING AND OTHER SKILLED
                                                                              TRADES

                                                    541                       Textiles And Garments Trades

                                                                 5411         Weavers and knitters
                                                                 5412         Upholsterers
                                                                 5413         Leather and related trades
                                                                 5414         Tailors and dressmakers
                                                                 5419         Textiles, garments and related trades n.e.c.

                                                    542                       Printing Trades

                                                                 5421         Originators, compositors and print preparers
                                                                 5422         Printers
                                                                 5423         Bookbinders and print finishers
                                                                 5424         Screen printers

                                                    543                       Food Preparation Trades

                                                                 5431         Butchers, meat cutters
                                                                 5432         Bakers, flour confectioners
                                                                 5433         Fishmongers, poultry dressers
                                                                 5434         Chefs, cooks

                                                    549                       Skilled Trades n.e.c.

                                                                 5491         Glass and ceramics makers, decorators and finishers
                                                                 5492         Furniture makers, other craft woodworkers
                                                                 5493         Pattern makers (moulds)
                                                                 5494         Musical instrument makers and tuners
                                                                 5495         Goldsmiths, silversmiths, precious stone workers
                                                                 5496         Floral arrangers, florists
                                                                 5499         Hand craft occupations n.e.c.




                       30      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                      Summary of Structure
Major   Sub-Major   Minor   Unit    Group Title
Group   Group       Group   Group

6                                   PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

        61                          CARING PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

                    611             Healthcare And Related Personal Services

                            6111    Nursing auxiliaries and assistants
                            6112    Ambulance staff (excluding paramedics)
                            6113    Dental nurses
                            6114    Houseparents and residential wardens
                            6115    Care assistants and home carers

                    612             Childcare And Related Personal Services

                            6121    Nursery nurses
                            6122    Childminders and related occupations
                            6123    Playgroup leaders/assistants
                            6124    Educational assistants

                    613             Animal Care Services

                            6131    Veterinary nurses and assistants
                            6139    Animal care occupations n.e.c.

        62                          LEISURE AND OTHER PERSONAL SERVICE
                                    OCCUPATIONS

                    621             Leisure And Travel Service Occupations

                            6211    Sports and leisure assistants
                            6212    Travel agents
                            6213    Travel and tour guides
                            6214    Air travel assistants
                            6215    Rail travel assistants
                            6219    Leisure and travel service occupations n.e.c.

                    622             Hairdressers And Related Occupations

                            6221    Hairdressers, barbers
                            6222    Beauticians and related occupations

                    623             Housekeeping Occupations

                            6231    Housekeepers and related occupations
                            6232    Caretakers

                    629             Personal Services Occupations n.e.c.

                            6291    Undertakers and mortuary assistants
                            6292    Pest control officers




                                            Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   31
                       Major      Sub-Major         Minor        Unit         Group Title
Summary of Structure



                       Group      Group             Group        Group

                       7                                                      SALES AND CUSTOMER SERVICE
                                                                              OCCUPATIONS

                                  71                                          SALES OCCUPATIONS

                                                    711                       Sales Assistants And Retail Cashiers

                                                                 7111         Sales and retail assistants
                                                                 7112         Retail cashiers and check-out operators
                                                                 7113         Telephone salespersons

                                                    712                       Sales Related Occupations

                                                                 7121         Collector salespersons and credit agents
                                                                 7122         Debt, rent and other cash collectors
                                                                 7123         Roundsmen/women and van salespersons
                                                                 7124         Market and street traders and assistants
                                                                 7125         Merchandisers and window dressers
                                                                 7129         Sales related occupations n.e.c.

                                  72                                          CUSTOMER SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

                                                    721                       Customer Service Occupations

                                                                 7211         Call centre agents/operators
                                                                 7212         Customer care occupations




                       32      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                     Summary of Structure
Major   Sub-Major   Minor   Unit    Group Title
Group   Group       Group   Group

8                                   PROCESS, PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES

        81                          PROCESS, PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES

                    811             Process Operatives

                            8111    Food, drink and tobacco process operatives
                            8112    Glass and ceramics process operatives
                            8113    Textile process operatives
                            8114    Chemical and related process operatives
                            8115    Rubber process operatives
                            8116    Plastics process operatives
                            8117    Metal making and treating process operatives
                            8118    Electroplaters
                            8119    Process operatives n.e.c.

                    812             Plant And Machine Operatives

                            8121    Paper and wood machine operatives
                            8122    Coal mine operatives
                            8123    Quarry workers and related operatives
                            8124    Energy plant operatives
                            8125    Metal working machine operatives
                            8126    Water and sewerage plant operatives
                            8129    Plant and machine operatives n.e.c.

                    813             Assemblers And Routine Operatives

                            8131    Assemblers (electrical products)
                            8132    Assemblers (vehicles and metal goods)
                            8133    Routine inspectors and testers
                            8134    Weighers, graders, sorters
                            8135    Tyre, exhaust and windscreen fitters
                            8136    Clothing cutters
                            8137    Sewing machinists
                            8138    Routine laboratory testers
                            8139    Assemblers and routine operatives n.e.c.

                    814             Construction Operatives

                            8141    Scaffolders, stagers, riggers
                            8142    Road construction operatives
                            8143    Rail construction and maintenance operatives
                            8149    Construction operatives n.e.c.

        82                          TRANSPORT AND MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS
                                    AND OPERATIVES

                    821             Transport Drivers And Operatives

                            8211    Heavy goods vehicle drivers
                            8212    Van drivers
                            8213    Bus and coach drivers
                            8214    Taxi, cab drivers and chauffeurs
                            8215    Driving instructors




                                           Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   33
                       Major      Sub-Major         Minor        Unit         Group Title
Summary of Structure



                       Group      Group             Group        Group

                                                                 8216         Rail transport operatives
                                                                 8217         Seafarers (merchant navy); barge, lighter and boat
                                                                              operatives
                                                                 8218         Air transport operatives
                                                                 8219         Transport operatives n.e.c.

                                                    822                       Mobile Machine Drivers And Operatives

                                                                 8221         Crane drivers
                                                                 8222         Fork-lift truck drivers
                                                                 8223         Agricultural machinery drivers
                                                                 8229         Mobile machine drivers and operatives n.e.c.




                       34      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                      Summary of Structure
Major   Sub-Major   Minor   Unit    Group Title
Group   Group       Group   Group

9                                   ELEMENTARY OCCUPATIONS

        91                          ELEMENTARY TRADES, PLANT AND STORAGE
                                    RELATED OCCUPATIONS

                    911             Elementary Agricultural Occupations

                            9111    Farm workers
                            9112    Forestry workers
                            9119    Fishing and agriculture related occupations n.e.c.

                    912             Elementary Construction Occupations

                            9121    Labourers in building and woodworking trades
                            9129    Labourers in other construction trades n.e.c.

                    913             Elementary Process Plant Occupations

                            9131    Labourers in foundries
                            9132    Industrial cleaning process occupations
                            9133    Printing machine minders and assistants
                            9134    Packers, bottlers, canners, fillers
                            9139    Labourers in process and plant operations n.e.c.

                    914             Elementary Goods Storage Occupations

                            9141    Stevedores, dockers and slingers
                            9149    Other goods handling and storage occupations n.e.c.


        92                          ELEMENTARY ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE
                                    OCCUPATIONS

                    921             Elementary Administration Occupations

                            9211    Postal workers, mail sorters, messengers, couriers
                            9219    Elementary office occupations n.e.c.

                    922             Elementary Personal Services Occupations

                            9221    Hospital porters
                            9222    Hotel porters
                            9223    Kitchen and catering assistants
                            9224    Waiters, waitresses
                            9225    Bar staff
                            9226    Leisure and theme park attendants
                            9229    Elementary personal services occupations n.e.c.




                                            Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   35
                       Major      Sub-Major         Minor        Unit         Group Title
Summary of Structure



                       Group      Group             Group        Group

                                                    923                       Elementary Cleaning Occupations

                                                                 9231         Window cleaners
                                                                 9232         Road sweepers
                                                                 9233         Cleaners, domestics
                                                                 9234         Launderers, dry cleaners, pressers
                                                                 9235         Refuse and salvage occupations
                                                                 9239         Elementary cleaning occupations n.e.c.

                                                    924                       Elementary Security Occupations

                                                                 9241         Security guards and related occupations
                                                                 9242         Traffic wardens
                                                                 9243         School crossing patrol attendants
                                                                 9244         School mid-day assistants
                                                                 9245         Car park attendants
                                                                 9249         Elementary security occupations n.e.c.

                                                    925                       Elementary Sales Occupations

                                                                 9251         Shelf fillers
                                                                 9259         Elementary sales occupations n.e.c.




                       36      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                           Major Group 1
                     MAJOR GROUP 1
               MANAGERS AND SENIOR OFFICIALS
This major group covers occupations whose main tasks consist of the direction and co-
ordination of the functioning of organisations and businesses, including internal departments
and sections, often with the help of subordinate managers and supervisors. Working
proprietors in small businesses are included, although allocated to separate minor groups
within the major group.


Most occupations in this major group will require a significant amount of knowledge and                     1
experience of the production processes, administrative procedures or service requirements
associated with the efficient functioning of organisations and businesses.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:
                                                                                                            2
11 CORPORATE MANAGERS
    111    CORPORATE MANAGERS AND SENIOR OFFICIALS
    112    PRODUCTION MANAGERS                                                                              3
    113    FUNCTIONAL MANAGERS
    114    QUALITY AND CUSTOMER CARE MANAGERS
    115    FINANCIAL INSTITUTION AND OFFICE MANAGERS
    116    MANAGERS IN DISTRIBUTION, STORAGE AND RETAILING                                                  4
    117    PROTECTIVE SERVICE OFFICERS
    118    HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES MANAGERS

12 MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN AGRICULTURE AND                                                              5
   SERVICES
    121    MANAGERS IN FARMING, HORTICULTURE, FORESTRY AND
           FISHING
    122    MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN HOSPITALITY AND LEISURE                                              6
           SERVICES
    123    MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN OTHER SERVICE
           INDUSTRIES
                                                                                                            7


                                                                                                            8


                                                                                                            9

                                                 Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   37
Major Group 1



                                                SUB-MAJOR GROUP 11
                                               CORPORATE MANAGERS
                Job holders in this sub-major group formulate government policy; direct the operations of
                major organisations, government departments and special interest organisations; organise
                and direct production, processing, maintenance and construction operations in industry;
                formulate, implement and advise on specialist functional activities within organisations;
                direct the operations of branches and offices of financial institutions; organise and co-
                ordinate the transportation of passengers, the storage and distribution of freight, and the
                sale of goods; manage the operations of the emergency services, customs and excise, the
  1             prison service and the armed forces; and co-ordinate the provision of health and social care
                services and establishments.


                                     MINOR GROUP 111
  2                       CORPORATE MANAGERS AND SENIOR OFFICIALS
                Job holders in this minor group formulate national and local government policy; plan,
                organise and direct government departments and plan and organise (usually with other
                managers) the operations of large companies and organisations employing over 500 people.
  3
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       1111 SENIOR OFFICIALS IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
                       1112 DIRECTORS AND CHIEF EXECUTIVES OF MAJOR
  4                         ORGANISATIONS
                       1113 SENIOR OFFICIALS IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT
                       1114 SENIOR OFFICIALS OF SPECIAL INTEREST ORGANISATIONS

  5
                1111 SENIOR OFFICIALS IN                                    TASKS
                     NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
                                                                            • evaluates departmental activities, discusses
  6             Job holders in this unit group formulate and ratify            problems with government officials and
                legislation and government policy, act as elected              administrators, notes national and international
                representatives of either Parliament, European                 opinion and formulates departmental policy;
                Parliament, Regional Parliaments or Assemblies, act
                as representatives of the government and direct the
                                                                            • recommends or reviews potential policy or
                                                                               legislation and offers advice and opinions on
                diplomatic operations of government departments.
  7                                                                            current policy;

                                                                            • investigates matters of concern to the general
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                       public or particular groups and recommends
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                      government action where appropriate;

  8             Entry is either by appointment, election or internal
                promotion.
                                                                            • advises on interpretation and implementation of
                                                                               policy decisions, acts and regulations;




  9

                38     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• tables questions to ministers and introduces




                                                                                                                  Major Group 1
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES
   proposals for government action.
                                                        Chief executive (major organisation)
                                                        Company director (major organisation)
RELATED JOB TITLES                                      Director (major organisation)
                                                        General manager (major organisation)
Assistant secretary/Grade 5 (government)                Managing director (major organisation)
Diplomat
Member of European Parliament
Member of Parliament
Permanent secretary (government)                        1113 SENIOR OFFICIALS IN
                                                             LOCAL GOVERNMENT
                                                        Workers in this unit group participate in the              1
1112 DIRECTORS AND CHIEF                                formulation and implementation of local government
     EXECUTIVES OF MAJOR                                policies, ensure that legal, statutory and other
     ORGANISATIONS                                      provisions concerning the running of a local authority
                                                        are observed, organise local authority office work
Workers in this unit group head large enterprises and   and resources.
organisations employing over 500 people at single
                                                                                                                   2
or multiple site establishments. They plan, direct
and co-ordinate, with other managers, the resources     TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
necessary for operations such as processing,            ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
production, construction, maintenance, transport,
storage, handling and warehousing, the resources of     There are no pre-set entry requirements. Candidates
                                                        are recruited with a variety of academic
                                                                                                                   3
offices performing clerical and related functions and
the specialist activities of enterprises and            qualifications or with relevant experience. Entry is
organisations not elsewhere classified.                 also possible by internal promotion.


TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                TASKS                                                      4
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                        • evaluates departmental performance, discusses
Entry is either by appointment, election or internal       problems with other officials and formulates
promotion.                                                 departmental policies;

                                                        • negotiates and monitors contracted out services          5
                                                           provided by the private sector;
TASKS
                                                        • studies and acts upon any legislation that may
• analyses economic, social, legal and other data          affect the local authority;
   and plans, formulates and directs the operation
   of a company or organisation;                        • represents the authority in its dealings with other
                                                           authorities and interest organisations;
                                                                                                                   6
• consults with subordinates to formulate,
   implement and review company policy;                 • advises on the interpretation and implementation
                                                           of local government policy.
• prepares, or arranges for the preparation of
   reports, budgets, forecasts or other information;
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                   7
• plans and controls the allocation of resources and
   the selection of senior staff;
                                                        Chief executive (local government)
• authorises funding for policy implementation          Town clerk
   programmes and institutes reporting, auditing
   and control systems.                                                                                            8


                                                                                                                   9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   39
Major Group 1



                1114 SENIOR OFFICIALS OF
                     SPECIAL INTEREST
                     ORGANISATIONS
                Workers in this unit group ensure that legal, statutory
                and other regulations concerning the running of trade
                associations, employers associations, learned
                societies, trade unions, charitable organisations and
                similar bodies are observed and act as representatives
                of the organisation concerned.


  1             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Entry is most common by election, internal
                promotion or direct appointment and is usually based
                on relevant experience although some employers
  2             also require candidates to have academic
                qualifications.


                TASKS
  3             • plans, organises, co-ordinates and directs the
                     resources of special interest organisations;

                • formulates and directs the implementation of
                     organisation policy;
  4             • represents union, association or organisation in
                     consultation or negotiation with government,
                     employers and other bodies;

                • stimulates public interest by providing publicity,
                     giving lectures and interviews and organising
  5                  appeals for a variety of causes;

                • directs or undertakes the preparation, publication
                     and dissemination of reports and other
                     information of interest to members and other
                     interested parties.
  6
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                General Secretary (trade union)
                Manager (charitable organisation)
  7             National organiser (charitable organisation)
                Ombudsman




  8


  9

                40       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                 Major Group 1
                                  MINOR GROUP 112
                               PRODUCTION MANAGERS
Job holders in this minor group plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate all activities and
resources involved with production, processing, maintenance and construction operations
in industry.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       1121 PRODUCTION, WORKS AND MAINTENANCE MANAGERS
       1122 MANAGERS IN CONSTRUCTION                                                                              1
       1123 MANAGERS IN MINING AND ENERGY


1121 PRODUCTION, WORKS AND                             • establishes causes of breakdowns, arranges for
     MAINTENANCE MANAGERS                                 any necessary repairs, keeps records of faults and      2
                                                          checks completed maintenance work for
Production, works and maintenance managers plan,          compliance with statutory regulations.
organise, direct and co-ordinate the activities and
resources necessary for production in manufacturing
industries and the maintenance of engineering items,   RELATED JOB TITLES
equipment and machinery.                                                                                          3
                                                       Engineering manager
                                                       Factory manager
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                               Production manager
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                              Service manager
                                                       Shift manager
There are no pre-set entry standards. Entry is         Works manager
                                                                                                                  4
possible with either a degree or equivalent
qualification, relevant experience or without
academic qualifications. On-the-job training is        1122 MANAGERS IN
provided and professional qualifications are
available.                                                  CONSTRUCTION                                          5
                                                       Managers in construction plan, organise, direct, co-
                                                       ordinate the construction and maintenance of civil
TASKS
                                                       and structural engineering works including houses,
                                                       flats, factories, roads and runways, bridges, tunnels
• liaises with other managers to plan overall
   production activity and daily manufacturing and
                                                       and railway works, harbour, dock and marine works
                                                       and water supply, drainage and sewage works.
                                                                                                                  6
   maintenance activity;

• manages production to ensure that orders are
   completed to an agreed date and conform to          TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
   customer and other requirements;                    ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                  7
• monitors production and production costs and         There are no pre-set entry standards. Entry is
   undertakes or arranges for the preparation of
                                                       possible with either a degree or equivalent
   reports and records;
                                                       qualification, relevant experience or without
• arranges for regular inspections of plant,           academic qualifications. On-the-job training is
   machinery and equipment to detect wear or           provided and professional qualifications are               8
   deterioration;                                      available.




                                                                                                                  9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   41
Major Group 1


                TASKS                                                         TASKS

                • receives invitations to tender, arranges for                • co-ordinates the activities of mines, quarries,
                     estimates and liaises with client, architect and            drilling operations and offshore installations;
                     engineers to prepare contract documents;
                                                                              • determines staffing, material and other needs;
                • plans site layout and access routes, advises on
                     technical problems and staffing, oversees                • co-ordinates and supervises coal-face production
                     implementation of site security and safety                  activities and ensures compliance with health and
                     procedures;                                                 safety regulations;

                • plans, directs and co-ordinates the construction            • ensures that all haulage, storage, purification and
                     and maintenance of civil and structural                     distribution work is performed efficiently and in
  1                  engineering works, including demolition                     compliance with statutory and other regulations;
                     contracts, open-cast mining works and pipeline
                                                                              • arranges for the provision of gas, water and
                     and piling contracts;
                                                                                 electricity supplies.
                • examines designs, drawings and specifications,
                     confirms programme of building work and lays
  2                  down building lines, levels, etc.;                       RELATED JOB TITLES

                • monitors and reports upon work in progress to               Operations manager (mining, water and energy)
                     ensure that materials and construction methods           Overman/woman
                     meet with specifications and statutory                   Quarry manager
                     requirements and that there are no deviations
  3                  from agreed plans.


                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Clerk of works
  4             Construction manager
                Contracts manager (building and contracting)
                Site manager


  5             1123 MANAGERS IN MINING AND
                     ENERGY
                Managers in mining, energy and water supply plan,
                organise, direct and co-ordinate the activities and
                resources necessary for the extraction of minerals
  6             and other natural deposits and the production, storage
                and provision of gas, water and electricity supplies.


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  7             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no pre-set entry standards. Entry is
                possible with either GCSEs/S grades or A levels/H
                grades, a BTEC/SQA award, a degree or equivalent
                qualification and/or with relevant experience. Some
  8             apprenticeships are available. Off- and on-the-job
                training is provided and can lead to professional
                qualifications.



  9

                42       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 1
                                   MINOR GROUP 113
                                FUNCTIONAL MANAGERS
Functional managers plan, organise and advise on specialist functions or fields of activity
in an organisation. They formulate and administer policies concerning the legal, financial,
marketing, sales, purchasing, work methods, public relations, personnel, information and
communication technology, and the research and development operations of an organisation.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       1131 FINANCIAL MANAGERS AND CHARTERED SECRETARIES
                                                                                                                    1
       1132 MARKETING AND SALES MANAGERS
       1133 PURCHASING MANAGERS
       1134 ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS MANAGERS
       1135 PERSONNEL, TRAINING AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS                                                            2
            MANAGERS
       1136 INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
            MANAGERS
       1137 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT MANAGERS
                                                                                                                    3
1131 FINANCIAL MANAGERS AND                                 collection and analysis of accounting, budgetary
     CHARTERED SECRETARIES                                  and related information;

Financial managers plan, organise, direct and co-        • liaises with other managers to determine                 4
ordinate financial information and advise on                company financial policy and staffing levels
company financial policy. Chartered secretaries             appropriate for accounting activities;
organise and direct the work associated with
                                                         • advises on company law or practice and ensures
meetings of directors and shareholders, act as
                                                            that company's articles and memorandum of
company representatives, control share registration
work in commercial enterprises, advise on company
                                                            association are adhered to;                             5
law and ensure that all related regulations concerning   • maintains share registers in accordance with the
the running of a company are observed.                      Companies Act and deals with all matters relating
                                                            to the sale, transfer and purchase of shares.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                                                                            6
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                RELATED JOB TITLES

Entry is possible with either GCSEs/S grades, A          Company registrar
levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award, a degree or           Company treasurer
equivalent qualification. Professional qualifications    Credit manager
are available and are required for certain posts.        Finance manager                                            7
                                                         Financial director
                                                         Merchant banker
TASKS

• advises on financial matters, plans external and
   internal audit programmes and arranges for the                                                                   8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   43
Major Group 1



                1132 MARKETING AND SALES                                      TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                     MANAGERS                                                 ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Marketing and sales managers plan, organise, direct           Entry is most common with A levels/H grades, a
                and undertake market research and formulate and               BTEC/SQA award, a degree or equivalent
                implement an organisation's marketing and sales               qualification. Off- and on-the-job training is
                policies.                                                     provided and professional qualifications are
                                                                              available.

                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     TASKS

                Entrants to the professional qualifications of the            • assesses the type, quality, quantity and price of
  1             Chartered Institute of Marketing require GCSEs/S                 items and dates when they must be available;
                grades, A levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award, an
                Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, a degree or                     • decides on whether orders should be put out to
                equivalent qualification and/or relevant experience.             tender and evaluates suppliers' quotes;
                NVQs/SVQs in Sales Management are available at                • negotiates contract with supplier and draws up
  2             Level 4.                                                         contract documents;

                                                                              • arranges for quality checks of incoming goods;
                TASKS
                                                                              • interviews suppliers' representatives and visits
                • liaises with other managers/staff to determine the             trade fairs.
  3                  range of goods or services to be sold;

                • discusses employer's or client's requirements,              RELATED JOB TITLES
                     plans surveys and analyses customers' reactions
                     to product, packaging, price, etc.;                      Purchasing director
                                                                              Purchasing manager
  4             • examines and analyses sales figures and prepares            Supplies manager
                     proposals for marketing campaigns and
                     promotional activities;

                • controls the recruitment and training of sales staff;

  5             • produces reports and recommendations                        1134 ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC
                     concerning marketing and sales strategies.
                                                                                   RELATIONS MANAGERS
                                                                              Advertising and public relations managers plan,
                RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              organise, direct and co-ordinate the advertising,
                                                                              public relations and public information activities of
  6             Business development manager
                                                                              an organisation.
                Commercial manager
                Export manager
                Marketing manager
                Product manager                                               TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                Sales and marketing director                                  ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  7             Sales manager
                                                                              There are no pre-set entry standards, although most
                                                                              entrants possess A levels/H grades, a degree or
                1133 PURCHASING MANAGERS                                      equivalent qualification. Entry is also possible with
                                                                              professional qualifications and/or relevant
                Purchasing managers (not retail) plan, organise,              experience. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.
  8             direct and co-ordinate the purchasing policies and            NVQs/SVQs in both Advertising and Public
                activities of industrial, commercial and government.          Relations are available at Levels 3 and 4.




  9

                44       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 1
TASKS                                                     TASKS

• liaises with client to discuss product/service to       • determines staffing needs;
   be marketed, defines target group and assesses
   the suitability of various media;                      • prepares job descriptions, drafts advertisements
                                                             and interviews candidates;
• conceives advertising campaign to impart the
   desired product image in an effective and              • monitors employee performance and discusses
   economical way;                                           career development needs with employees;

• reviews and revises campaign in light of sales          • provides or arranges for provision of training
   figures, surveys, etc.;                                   courses;

                                                          • undertakes industrial relations negotiations with
• stays abreast of changes in media, readership or
   viewing figures and advertising rates;                    employees representatives or trade unions;
                                                                                                                     1
• arranges conferences, exhibitions, seminars, etc.       • develops and administers salary, health and safety
   to promote the image of a product, service or             and promotion policies;
   organisation.
                                                          • examines and reports upon company and
                                                             departmental structures, chains of command,             2
                                                             information flows, etc. and evaluates efficiency
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                             of existing operations;
Advertising manager                                       • considers alternative work procedures to improve
Media director                                               productivity.
Public relations manager                                                                                             3
Publicity manager
                                                          RELATED JOB TITLES
1135 PERSONNEL, TRAINING AND
                                                          Human resources manager
     INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS                                 Industrial relations manager
     MANAGERS                                             Personnel manager
                                                                                                                     4
                                                          Training manager
Job holders within this unit group plan, organise,        Works study manager
direct the personnel, training and industrial relations
policies of organisations, advise on resource
allocation and utilisation problems, measure the
effectiveness of an organisation's systems, methods       1136 INFORMATION AND                                       5
and procedures and advise on, plan and implement               COMMUNICATION
procedures to improve utilisation of labour,                   TECHNOLOGY MANAGERS
equipment and materials.
                                                          Job holders in this unit group plan, organise, direct

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                          and co-ordinate the work necessary to operate and          6
                                                          provide information communication technology
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                 services, to maintain and develop associated network
                                                          facilities and to provide software and hardware
There are no pre-set entry standards, although entry      support.
is most common with a degree or equivalent
qualification. Off- and on-the-job training is                                                                       7
provided and professional qualifications are              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
available. NVQs/SVQs in Personnel Support,                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Personnel Management and Personnel Strategy are
available at Levels 3, 4 and 5 respectively. NVQs/        There are no pre-set entry requirements. Candidates
SVQs in Training and Development are available at         are recruited with a variety of academic
Levels 3 and 4.                                           qualifications and/or relevant experience. Off- and        8


                                                                                                                     9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   45
Major Group 1


                on-the-job training is provided. Modern                        TASKS
                Apprenticeships, professional qualifications and
                NVQs/SVQs at Levels 2, 3 and 4 are available.                  • establishes product design and performance
                                                                                  objectives in consultation with other business
                                                                                  functions;
                TASKS
                                                                               • liaises with production departments to investigate
                • plans, organises and directs the information and                manufacturing problems and investigations;
                     communication technology resources of an
                     organisation;                                             • develops research methodology, implements and
                                                                                  reports upon research investigations undertaken;
                • liaises with user group representatives to clarify
                     requirements and development needs;                       • plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates
  1             • implements feasibility studies to guide the
                                                                                  responsibilities of the research and development
                                                                                  team;
                     development and direction of Information and
                     Communication Technology (ICT) systems;                   • monitors the standards of scientific and technical
                                                                                  research undertaken by research team.
                • plans work schedules and assigns tasks to ICT
  2                  staff;
                                                                               RELATED JOB TITLES
                • advises on the uses and capabilities of ICT
                     services;                                                 Director of research
                                                                               Laboratory manager
                • co-ordinates the introduction of new ICT systems             Research manager
                     or the modification of existing systems.
  3
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Computer manager
  4             Computer operations manager
                Data processing manager
                IT manager
                Systems manager
                Telecom manager

  5             1137 RESEARCH AND
                     DEVELOPMENT MANAGERS
                Managers in this unit group plan, organise, co-
                ordinate and direct resources to undertake the
  6             systematic investigation necessary for the
                development of new, or to enhance the performance
                of existing products and services.


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  7             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent
                qualification. Training is usually provided on-the-
                job, although support may be provided for
                postgraduate study. Professional qualifications are
  8             available.




  9

                46        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 1
                         MINOR GROUP 114
               QUALITY AND CUSTOMER CARE MANAGERS
Quality and customer care managers plan, organise, co-ordinate and direct resources
necessary for measuring, monitoring and reporting upon the qualitative aspects of a product
or service, and for receiving and dealing with the responses, complaints and further needs
of customers.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       1141 QUALITY ASSURANCE MANAGERS
                                                                                                                     1
       1142 CUSTOMER CARE MANAGERS


1141 QUALITY ASSURANCE                                    • attends meetings with managers to discuss quality
     MANAGERS                                                related problems and possible methods for
                                                             quality improvement.
                                                                                                                     2
Managers in this unit group plan, organise, co-
ordinate and direct resources necessary for the
effective measuring, monitoring and reporting on the      RELATED JOB TITLES
qualitative aspects of a specified tangible (industrial
production) or non-tangible (service provision)           Quality assurance manager                                  3
output.                                                   Quality control manager
                                                          Quality manager

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                          1142 CUSTOMER CARE                                         4
There are no pre-set entry standards. Formal                   MANAGERS
academic requirements will vary between
occupations. Entry is possible with GCSEs/S grades,       Workers in this unit group plan, organise, co-ordinate
A levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award, a degree or          and direct resources necessary for receiving and
equivalent qualification and/or with relevant
experience. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.
                                                          dealing with the responses, complaints or further
                                                          requirements of purchasers and users of a product
                                                                                                                     5
NVQs/SVQs that encompass quality assurance                or service.
elements are available up to Level 4.

                                                          TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
TASKS                                                     ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                  6
• develops and implements visual, physical,               There are no pre-set entry requirements. Candidates
   functional or other appropriate measures and           are recruited with a variety of academic
   tests of quality;                                      qualifications and/or relevant experience. Specialist
• analyses and report upon the results of quality         qualifications may be required for work within
   control tests to ensure that production remains        certain sectors.                                           7
   within specification;

• considers the impact of legislation upon                TASKS
   specification requirements;
                                                          • develop and implement policies and procedures
• examines current operating procedures to                   to deal effectively with customer requirements          8
   determine how quality may be improved;                    and complaints;




                                                                                                                     9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   47
                • co-ordinates and controls the work of those
Major Group 1



                     within customer services departments;

                • discuss customer responses with other managers
                     with a view to improving the product or service
                     provided;

                • plan, co-ordinate and direct the operations of help
                     and advisory services to provide support for
                     customers and users.


                RELATED JOB TITLES
  1
                Customer relations manager
                Customer service manager
                Help desk manager


  2


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                48       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 1
                        MINOR GROUP 115
          FINANCIAL INSTITUTION AND OFFICE MANAGERS
Workers in this minor group organise, co-ordinate and direct the day-to-day running of
banks, building societies, post offices, insurance companies and other financial institutions.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       1151 FINANCIAL INSTITUTION MANAGERS
       1152 OFFICE MANAGERS
                                                                                                                    1
1151 FINANCIAL INSTITUTION                               RELATED JOB TITLES
     MANAGERS
                                                         Bank manager
Job holders in this unit group plan, organise, direct
and co-ordinate the activities and resources of banks,
                                                         Branch manager (bank, building society)
                                                         Building society manager
                                                                                                                    2
building societies, insurance companies and post         Post Office manager
offices.                                                 Sub-postmaster


TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                                                                            3
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                1152 OFFICE MANAGERS
Entry is possible with Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ                Workers in this unit group plan, organise, direct and
Level III, A levels/H grades, a degree or equivalent     co-ordinate the activities and resources of offices
qualification. Those with higher qualifications          within commercial, public and other organisations.
obtain accelerated training. Internal promotion to                                                                  4
management is also possible. On-the-job training is
provided. Professional qualifications are available      TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
and often mandatory.                                     ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS


TASKS
                                                         Entry will usually require GCSEs/S grades but is
                                                         possible with other academic qualifications and/or
                                                                                                                    5
                                                         relevant experience. Professional qualifications are
• plans, organises, directs and co-ordinates the         available in some occupations.
   activities of financial institutions;

• verifies that accounting, recording and
   information storage and retrieval procedures are      TASKS                                                      6
   adhered to;
                                                         • plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates
• authorises loans and mortgages in accordance              responsibilities;
   with bank or building society policy;
                                                         • advises on the handling of all correspondence
• promotes financial services, establishes contact          and enquiries relating to accounts, sales,              7
   with the local business community and                    statistical and vacancy records;
   professional firms;
                                                         • ensures that procedures for considering, issuing,
• preparing general reports and briefs on more              amending and endorsing insurance policies are
   complex cases for senior management.                     adhered to;
                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   49
                • plans, organises, directs and co-ordinates the
Major Group 1



                     activities and resources of other offices not
                     elsewhere classified including box offices, other
                     ticket offices and accommodation bureaux.


                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Accounts manager
                Administration manager
                Office manager


  1


  2


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                50       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                  Major Group 1
                   MINOR GROUP 116
   MANAGERS IN DISTRIBUTION, STORAGE AND RETAILING
Managers in distribution, storage and retailing plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate the
activities and resources necessary for the efficient and convenient transportation of
passengers or freight, the loading, unloading, storage and distribution of goods and materials,
and the sale of wholesale and retail goods to customers.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       1161 TRANSPORT AND DISTRIBUTION MANAGERS
                                                                                                                   1
       1162 STORAGE AND WAREHOUSE MANAGERS
       1163 RETAIL AND WHOLESALE MANAGERS


1161 TRANSPORT AND                                         staffing and distribution expenditure to determine      2
     DISTRIBUTION MANAGERS                                 future distribution policies;

Transport and distribution managers plan, organise,     • ensures that regulations regarding hours of work,
direct and co-ordinate the activities and resources        the licensing of crews and transport equipment,
                                                           the operational safety and efficiency of
necessary for the safe, efficient and economic
movement of passengers and freight by road, rail,          equipment, the insurance of vehicles and other          3
sea and air transport.                                     statutory regulations are complied with;

                                                        • ensures that harbour channels and berths are
                                                           maintained and liaises with ship owners, crew,
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                           customs officials, dock and harbour staff to
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                           arrange entry, berthing and servicing of ships;         4
Candidates are recruited with a variety of academic     • supervises day-to-day activities in a railway
qualifications and/or with relevant experience.            station;
Entrants to management trainee schemes offered by
larger companies will require GCSEs/S grades, A         • arranges for maintenance of airport runways and
levels/H grades, a degree or other equivalent              buildings, liaises with fuel and catering crews to      5
qualifications. Off- and on-the-job training is            ensure adequate supplies and resolves any
provided. Professional qualifications are available.       complaints and problems raised by airport users.
Legislation of the European Union requires all
transport managers to hold a Certificate of
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES
Professional Competence (CPC).
                                                                                                                   6
                                                        Harbour master
TASKS                                                   Station master
                                                        Traffic manager
• plans the optimum utilisation of staff and            Transport manager
   operating equipment, and co-ordinates                                                                           7
   maintenance activities to ensure least possible
                                                        1162 STORAGE AND WAREHOUSE
   disruption to services;
                                                             MANAGERS
• examines traffic reports, load patterns, traffic
   receipts and other data and revises transport        Managers within this unit group plan, organise, direct
                                                        and co-ordinate the procedures and resources
   services or freight rates accordingly;
                                                        necessary for the receipt, storage and warehousing
                                                                                                                   8
• directs the movement, handling and storage of         of goods and for the maintenance of stocks at an
   freight in transit, and reviews space utilisation,   optimal level.


                                                                                                                   9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   51
Major Group 1


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      degree or equivalent qualification. Entry is also
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     possible through promotion after gaining sufficient
                                                                              experience. NVQs/SVQs in Retail Operations are
                Academic qualifications may be required for some              available at Level 4.
                posts and entry is also possible with relevant
                experience. Training is usually provided on-the-job.
                NVQs/SVQs in Distribution and Warehousing                     TASKS
                Operations are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.
                                                                              • provides information about merchandise to staff
                                                                                 and customers;
                TASKS
                                                                              • ensures that adequate reserves of merchandise
                • liaises with production, maintenance, sales and                are held and that stock keeping is carried out
  1                  other departments to determine the materials and            efficiently;
                     other items required for current and future
                                                                              • maintains financial and other records and
                     production schedules and sales commitments;
                                                                                 controls security arrangements for the premises;
                • reviews, develops and implements stock control,             • authorises payment for supplies received and
                     handling and distribution policies to maximise
  2                  use of space, money, labour and other resources;
                                                                                 decides on vending price and credit terms;

                                                                              • examines quality of merchandise and ensures that
                • advises purchasing department on type, quality                 effective use is made of advertising and display
                     and quantity of goods required and dates by
                                                                                 facilities.
                     which they must be available;
  3             • prepares reports on expenditure and advises on
                     materials and parts standardisation, future stores       RELATED JOB TITLES
                     and stock control policies;
                                                                              Baker's manager
                • decides on storage conditions for particular                Garden centre manager
                     items, allocates warehouse space and arranges            Retail manager
  4                  for regular stock inspections to detect                  Shop manager (retail trade)
                     deterioration or damage.                                 Showroom manager
                                                                              Wholesale manager

                RELATED JOB TITLES
  5             Parts manager
                Stock control manager
                Stores manager
                Warehouse manager

  6
                1163 RETAIL AND WHOLESALE
                     MANAGERS
                Retail and wholesale managers plan, organise, direct
                and co-ordinate the operations of retail and wholesale
  7             establishments.


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  8             Entry requirements vary from company to company.
                Entrants may possess GCSEs/S grades, A levels/H
                grades, GNVQs/GSVQs, a BTEC/SQA award, a


  9

                52       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                Major Group 1
                             MINOR GROUP 117
                        PROTECTIVE SERVICE OFFICERS
Protective service officers manage the operations of police stations, fire stations and prisons,
supervise customs, excise and immigration staff and assist with inspections of goods and
persons entering or leaving the country and serve as commissioned officers in Her Majesty's
armed forces and in foreign and Commonwealth armed forces.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       1171 OFFICERS IN ARMED FORCES
                                                                                                                 1
       1172 POLICE OFFICERS (INSPECTORS AND ABOVE)
       1173 SENIOR OFFICERS IN FIRE, AMBULANCE, PRISON AND
            RELATED SERVICES
       1174 SECURITY MANAGERS
                                                                                                                 2
1171 OFFICERS IN ARMED                                   authorities as requested or when faced with civil
     FORCES                                              disorder, natural disaster or other emergency;

Workers in this unit group serve as commissioned      • monitors record keeping systems and prepares             3
officers in Her Majesty's armed forces, foreign          reports and expenditure estimates.
and Commonwealth armed forces; plan, direct,
organise and administer military operations and
                                                      RELATED JOB TITLES
perform duties for which there is no civilian
equivalent.
                                                      Captain                                                    4
                                                      Commissioned officer
                                                      Flight-Lieutenant
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                      Lieutenant
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                      Lieutenant-Commander
                                                      Major
Entry to the UK armed forces is possible with
                                                      Squadron Leader                                            5
GCSEs/S grades, A levels/H grades or with higher
academic qualifications or by promotion from NCO
or other rank. Each arm of the forces has different
age restrictions. Candidates must pass a medical      1172 POLICE OFFICERS
examination and interview.                                 (INSPECTORS AND ABOVE)
                                                                                                                 6
                                                      Police officers plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate
TASKS                                                 the resources and activities of a specific geographical
                                                      or functional area of generalised or specialised police
• advises and provides information on military        work.
   aspects of defence policy;
                                                                                                                 7
• plans, directs and co-ordinates training and        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
   military manoeuvres;                               ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
• supervises the operation of military units and
   monitors the activities of junior officers, NCOs   Entry is only possible by internal promotion from
   and other ranks;                                   sergeant. Degree or equivalent qualification holders       8
                                                      may obtain accelerated promotion. All police forces
• plans, directs and administers aid to civilian      have age restrictions and medical requirements.



                                                                                                                 9

                                                      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   53
Major Group 1


                TASKS                                                         Entry to the prison service is also subject to age and
                                                                              height restrictions. Entry to senior positions within
                • liaises with senior officers to determine staff,            the ambulance service is largely by internal
                     financial and other short and long term needs;           promotion from supervisory roles.
                • plans, directs and co-ordinates general policing
                     for an area or functional unit;                          TASKS
                • directs and monitors the work of subordinate                • liaises with senior officials and/or government
                     officers;
                                                                                 departments to determine staffing, financial and
                • establishes contacts and sources of information                other short and long term needs;
                     concerning crimes planned or committed;
                                                                              • prepares reports for insurance companies, the
  1             • directs and co-ordinates the operation of record               Home Office, Scottish Home and Health
                     keeping systems and the preparation of reports.             Department, and other bodies as necessary;

                                                                              • advises on the recruitment, training and
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                               monitoring of staff;

  2             Assistant chief constable
                                                                              • fire officers plan, direct and co-ordinate an
                                                                                 operational plan for one or more fire stations,
                Chief constable                                                  attend fires and other emergencies to minimise
                Chief inspector (police service)                                 danger to property and people, arrange for the
                Chief superintendent (police service)                            salvaging of goods, immediate temporary repairs
                Deputy chief constable                                           and security measures for fire damaged premises
  3                                                                              as necessary;
                1173 SENIOR OFFICERS IN FIRE,                                 • ambulance officers plan, organise, direct and co-
                     AMBULANCE, PRISON AND                                       ordinate the activities of ambulance personnel
                     RELATED SERVICES                                            and control room assistants, for the provision of
                                                                                 ambulance services for emergency and non-
  4             Fire officers plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate             emergency cases;
                the activities and resources of a specific physical or
                functional area of a statutory or private fire brigade        • prison offices interview prisoner on arrival and
                and the resources necessary for the protection of                discharge/departure, receive reports on
                property at fires within a salvage corps area.                   disciplinary problems and decide on appropriate
                Ambulance officers plan, organise, direct and co-                action and make periodic checks on internal and
  5             ordinate the resources necessary for the provision               external security;
                of ambulance services. Prison officers (principal
                officer and above) plan, organise, direct, and co-            • customs, excise and immigration officers advise
                ordinate the activities and resources necessary for              on the interpretation of regulations concerning
                the running of a prison, remand or detention centre.             taxes, duties and immigration requirements and
                                                                                 enforce these regulations through monitoring of
  6             Customs officers plan and direct the work of
                                                                                 premises, examining goods entering the country
                customs, excise and immigration staff in the
                monitoring and inspection of goods and persons                   to ensure correct duty is paid and establishing
                crossing national borders.                                       that passengers have the necessary authorisation
                                                                                 for crossing national borders.

  7             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     RELATED JOB TITLES

                The position of fire officer is achieved by internal          Chief immigration officer
                promotion from Fireman, Leading fireman or Sub-               Chief preventive officer
                officer. Entry to senior positions within the prison          Fire officer
  8             service and customs and excise are either by internal         Governor (prison service)
                promotion or by open competition. Candidates                  Principal officer (prison service)
                typically possess a degree or equivalent qualification.       Station officer (ambulance service)


  9

                54       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 1
1174 SECURITY MANAGERS
Managers in this unit group plan, organise, direct
and co-ordinate the resources and activities necessary
for the provision of private detective services and
security measures for individuals, establishments,
organisations or for broader geographical areas.


TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Appointment may occur through promotion from                                                                        1
supervisory security posts.          Professional
qualifications are available and may be required by
some employers. Off- and on-the-job training is
provided. NVQs/SVQs at Levels 2 and 3 are
available.                                                                                                          2
TASKS

• plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates
   responsibilities of detective and security staff;                                                                3
• analyses current security requirements, advises
   clients, and develops and implements appropriate
   security measures;

• oversees the security clearance of new members
   of an organisation;
                                                                                                                    4
• arranges for the monitoring, reporting and
   reviewing of present procedures with a view to
   improving the efficacy of security arrangements;

• ensures that the activities of detective and                                                                      5
   security staff comply with legal requirements and
   liaises with civil law enforcement authorities
   where necessary.


RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                    6
Operations manager (security services)
Owner (detective agency)
Owner (security services)
Security manager                                                                                                    7


                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   55
Major Group 1



                                           MINOR GROUP 118
                                 HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES MANAGERS
                Managers in health and social services plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate the activities
                and resources necessary for the efficient provision of primary and secondary health care
                services, social care establishments and other welfare services.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                        1181    HOSPITAL AND HEALTH SERVICE MANAGERS
  1                     1182    PHARMACY MANAGERS
                        1183    HEALTHCARE PRACTICE MANAGERS
                        1184    SOCIAL SERVICES MANAGERS
                        1185    RESIDENTIAL AND DAY CARE MANAGERS
  2
                1181 HOSPITAL AND HEALTH                                      RELATED JOB TITLES
                     SERVICE MANAGERS
                                                                              Clinical manager
                                                                              Health service manager
  3             Managers in this unit group plan, organise, direct
                and co-ordinate the resources and activities of health        Manager (hospital service)
                care providers and purchasers at both district and
                unit level.
                                                                              1182 PHARMACY MANAGERS
  4             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              Pharmacy managers plan, organise, co-ordinate and
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              direct the resources and activities of retail, hospital
                                                                              and industrial pharmacies.
                Entrants require a degree or equivalent qualification,
                a professional qualification and/or relevant
                experience. Off- and on-the-job training is provided          TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  5             through management training schemes. The nature               ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                of schemes vary between regions and occupational
                areas.                                                        Pharmacists require an accredited university degree
                                                                              in pharmacy. Pharmacists working in hospital or
                                                                              industrial posts usually possess a postgraduate
                TASKS
  6                                                                           qualification. Professional qualifications are
                                                                              available and mandatory for pharmacists working
                • the day-to-day management of a service or unit;
                                                                              in retail and hospital posts.
                • liaises with health care professionals to determine
                     short and long term needs and how to meet these
                     objectives within budgetary constraints;                 TASKS
  7
                • negotiates contracts with providers and                     • prepare and dispense medicines to hospital
                     purchasers of health care services;                         patients and on prescription to the general public;
                • monitor and report upon the effectiveness of                • advise customers on how to use prescribed
                     services with a view to improving the efficiency            medicines and provide information on the sale
  8                  of health care provision.                                   of over the counter medicines;




  9

                56       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• responsible for stock control, ordering, labelling,




                                                                                                                  Major Group 1
                                                        1184 SOCIAL SERVICES
   maintaining prescription files and recording the          MANAGERS
   issue of narcotics, poisons and other habit
   forming drugs;                                       Job holders in this unit group plan, organise, direct
                                                        and co-ordinate the resources necessary to protect
• liaises with other health care professionals with     the welfare of certain groups within local authorities
   regards to the supply and form of appropriate        including children and young people, families under
   medications;                                         stress, people with disabilities, elderly people and
• research, develop, test and manufacture new           people who are mentally or physically ill.
   pharmaceutical products.
                                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
RELATED JOB TITLES                                      ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                  1
Pharmacist's manager                                    Entry is usually through internal promotion for those
Shop manager (retail trade, pharmacists)                with the appropriate professional qualifications and
                                                        relevant experience. Post-qualifying professional
                                                        qualifications are available.
                                                                                                                   2
1183 HEALTHCARE PRACTICE
     MANAGERS                                           TASKS

Job holders in this unit group plan, organise, direct   • responsibility for meeting the statutory
and co-ordinate the work and resources of medical,         requirements of local authority social services
dental and other forms of health care practice.            departments;                                            3
                                                        • determines staffing, financial, material and other
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                   short and long term needs;
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                               • plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates
There are no pre-set entry requirements. Candidates
                                                           responsibilities of social services staff;              4
are recruited with a variety of academic                • monitors and evaluates departmental
qualifications or with relevant experience.                performance with a view to improving social
Professional qualifications are available and are          service provision;
required for certain posts.
                                                        • studies and advises upon changes in legislation
                                                           that will impact upon social service provision;
                                                                                                                   5
TASKS
                                                        • liaises with representatives of other relevant
• plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates        agencies.
   responsibilities of practice staff;
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                   6
• negotiates contracts for services with other
   health care providers and purchasers;
                                                        Social services manager
• maintains patient files on medical history,           Team manager (social services)
   consultations made and treatment undertaken
   and/or drugs prescribed;
                                                        1185 RESIDENTIAL AND DAY
                                                                                                                   7
• responsible for budgeting, pricing and accounting          CARE MANAGERS
   activities within the practice.
                                                        Managers in this group plan, organise, direct and
                                                        co-ordinate the resources necessary in the provision
RELATED JOB TITLES                                      and running of residential and day care                    8
                                                        establishments for persons who require specialised
Medical practice manager (health services)              care and/or supervision.



                                                                                                                   9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   57
Major Group 1


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no pre-set entry standards. Entry is based
                largely upon experience. Off- and on-the-job training
                is provided. NVQs/SVQs in Care and Community
                Work are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.


                TASKS

                • determines staffing, financial, material and other
                     short and long term requirements;
  1
                • plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates
                     responsibilities of staff;

                • arranges for payment of bills, keeps accounts and
                     adheres to health, safety and other statutory
  2                  requirements;

                • maintains contact between residents and the local
                     community and/or family and friends;

                • ensures that residents have access to health and
  3                  social care services as required;

                • creates a friendly secure atmosphere to gain the
                     trust and confidence of those in the home or under
                     supervision;

  4             • ensures that the physical comfort and all material
                     needs of residents are provided and attempts to
                     resolve problems that may arise.


                RELATED JOB TITLES
  5
                Care manager
                Manager (nursing home)
                Owner (retirement home)
                Residential manager

  6


  7


  8


  9

                58       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 1
              SUB-MAJOR GROUP 12
    MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN AGRICULTURE
                 AND SERVICES
Job holders in this sub-major group manage agricultural, forestry, fishing and environmental
operations; co-ordinate and direct the activities of restaurants, hotels, entertainment
establishments, sports and leisure facilities, travel and property agencies, independent shops,
garages, hairdressers and other services.


                          MINOR GROUP 121                                                                           1
                 MANAGERS IN FARMING, HORTICULTURE,
                       FORESTRY AND FISHING
Workers in this minor group plan, organise, direct, and control the activities and resources
of agricultural, forestry, fishing and similar establishments and are responsible for the                           2
protection and management of the natural environment.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       1211 FARM MANAGERS
                                                                                                                    3
       1212 NATURAL ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION MANAGERS
       1219 MANAGERS IN ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, FORESTRY AND FISHING
            NEC
                                                                                                                    4
1211 FARM MANAGERS                                       TASKS

                                                         • determines financial, staffing and other short and
Managers in this unit group plan, organise and co-
ordinate the activities and resources of farming
                                                            long term needs;                                        5
establishments cultivating arable crops, fruits, trees   • produces and maintains records of production,
and shrubs and/or raising cattle, sheep, pigs and           finance and breeding;
poultry.                                                 • decides or advises on the types of crops to be
                                                            grown or livestock raised;
                                                                                                                    6
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 • plans intensity and sequence of farm operations
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                   and orders seed, fertiliser, farming equipment and
                                                            other supplies;
Most farm and horticultural managers have a              • markets and arranges for the sale of crops,
vocational agricultural qualification. These range
from BTEC/SQA awards to postgraduate
                                                            livestock and other farm produce.                       7
qualifications in farm business organisation and         RELATED JOB TITLES
management. Candidates must normally have had
practical agricultural experience before starting a      Farm manager
course. NVQs/SVQs in Agriculture are available at        Manager (agriculture)
Level 4.                                                 Manager (horticulture)
                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   59
Major Group 1



                1212 NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                      and fishing not elsewhere classified in MINOR
                     AND CONSERVATION                                         GROUP 121: Managers in Farming, Horticulture,
                                                                              Forestry and Fishing.
                     MANAGERS
                Workers in this unit group plan, co-ordinate, direct
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                and organise the resources and activities necessary
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                for the protection, maintenance and management of
                the general environment or of specific areas
                                                                              Entry requirements range from no qualifications to
                designated to be of special status.
                                                                              degree level or equivalent awards depending on the
                                                                              occupation. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      Professional qualifications and NVQs/SVQs are
                                                                              available in some areas.
  1             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Entrants usually possess a BTEC/SQA award, a
                                                                              TASKS
                degree or equivalent qualification. Extensive pre-
                entry experience is essential. Professional
                qualifications, higher degrees and postgraduate
                                                                              • determines staffing, financial and other long and
  2             diplomas are available and may be required for
                                                                                 short term needs and keeps records on finance,
                                                                                 production and breeding;
                certain posts.
                                                                              • decides, or advises on, type of animal to be bred
                                                                                 and/or trained and selects, buys and trains
                TASKS                                                            animals accordingly;
  3             • responsible for managing and protecting the                 • plans and directs the establishment of forest
                     environment in areas designated to be of special            nurseries, assumes responsibility for a particular
                     interest;                                                   area of forest/woodland and regularly inspects
                                                                                 forest work;
                • represents the interests of the environment in
  4                  reconciling conflicts between the interests of           • selects suitable breeding grounds for shellfish,
                     business, the general public and the local                  sea and freshwater fish and purchases stock;
                     community;
                                                                              • advises farmers and horticulturists on cropping
                • co-ordinates the provision of information and                  requirements, cultivation problems and
                     provides controlled and safe access to the                  gardening and grounds keeping;
                     countryside for members of the public;
  5                                                                           • organises, co-ordinates and directs farming,
                • ensures that any development within protected                  fishing and forestry activities not elsewhere
                     areas is undertaken in accordance with planning             classified, including tree felling, agricultural
                     and other statutory requirements.                           contracting and offshore fishing.

  6             RELATED JOB TITLES                                            RELATED JOB TITLES

                Conservation manager                                          Cattery owner
                Countryside manager                                           Fish farm manager
                Environmental manager                                         Kennels owner
  7             National park manager                                         Nursery manager (horticulture)
                                                                              Racehorse trainer
                1219 MANAGERS IN ANIMAL
                     HUSBANDRY, FORESTRY AND
                     FISHING NEC
  8
                Managers in this unit group perform a variety of
                managerial tasks in farming, horticulture, forestry



  9

                60       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 1
                      MINOR GROUP 122
           MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN HOSPITALITY
                    AND LEISURE SERVICES
Workers in this minor group plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate (usually with the help of
other managers) the activities and resources of hotels, public houses and similar
establishments, restaurants, recreation and entertainment establishments, leisure and sports
facilities and travel agencies.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
                                                                                                                     1
       1221    HOTEL AND ACCOMMODATION MANAGERS
       1222    CONFERENCE AND EXHIBITION MANAGERS
       1223    RESTAURANT AND CATERING MANAGERS
       1224    PUBLICANS AND MANAGERS OF LICENSED PREMISES
                                                                                                                     2
       1225    LEISURE AND SPORTS MANAGERS
       1226    TRAVEL AGENCY MANAGERS


1221 HOTEL AND                                            • approves and arranges shipboard entertainment            3
     ACCOMMODATION                                           and shore trips and liaises with ship's agent to
                                                             ensure that ship is adequately provisioned;
     MANAGERS
                                                          • arranges for payment of bills, keeps accounts and
Job holders in this unit group plan, organise, direct
                                                             adheres to licensing and other statutory
and co-ordinate the activities and resources of hotels,
                                                             regulations.                                            4
hostels, lodging homes, holiday camps, holiday flats
and chalets and organise the domestic, catering, and
entertainment facilities on passenger ships.
                                                          RELATED JOB TITLES

                                                          Caravan park owner
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                          Guest house proprietor
                                                                                                                     5
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                          Hotel manager
Entry is possible with a variety of academic              Hotelier
qualifications and/or relevant experience. Larger
hotel chains offer managerial trainee schemes.
Candidates for these usually require a BTEC/SQA
                                                          1222 CONFERENCE AND
                                                                                                                     6
award, a degree or equivalent qualification, or a
professional qualification. Off- and on-the-job                EXHIBITION MANAGERS
training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in Accommodation
Management are available at Level 4.                      Conference and exhibition managers plan, organise,
                                                          co-ordinate and direct the resources necessary for
                                                          the staging of conferences, exhibitions and other          7
TASKS                                                     similar events.

• analyses demand and decides on type, standard
   and cost of services to be offered;                    TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                          ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
• ensures physical comfort of residents or                                                                           8
   passengers and makes special arrangements for          Entry is possible with a variety of academic
   children, the elderly and the infirm if required;      qualifications and/or relevant experience. Larger



                                                                                                                     9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   61
                                                                              • purchases or directs the purchasing of supplies
Major Group 1


                conference and exhibition management companies
                may offer training schemes. Candidates for these                 and arranges for preparation of accounts;
                typically require a BTEC/SQA award, a degree or
                an equivalent qualification. Off- and on-the-job              • verifies that quality of food, beverages and
                training is provided.                                            waiting service are as required and that kitchen
                                                                                 and dining areas are kept clean in compliance
                                                                                 with statutory requirements;
                TASKS
                                                                              • plans and arranges food preparation in
                • discusses conference and exhibition                            collaboration with other staff and organises the
                     requirements with clients;                                  provision of waiting or counter staff;

                • develops proposals encompassing technical and               • checks that supplies are properly used and
  1                  creative inputs, and presents proposals to clients;         accounted for to prevent wastage and loss and to
                                                                                 keep within budget limit.
                • allocates exhibition space to exhibitors;
                • plans work schedules, assigns tasks, and co-                RELATED JOB TITLES
                     ordinates the activities of designers, crafts persons,
                     technical staff, caterers and other events staff;
  2                                                                           Canteen manager
                • ensures that Health and Safety and other statutory          Catering manager
                     regulations are met.                                     Fish and chip shopkeeper
                                                                              Restaurant manager
                                                                              Restaurateur
                RELATED JOB TITLES
  3
                Conference manager
                Exhibition manager                                            1224 PUBLICANS AND MANAGERS
                                                                                   OF LICENSED PREMISES
                1223 RESTAURANT AND                                           Publicans and managers of licensed premises
  4                  CATERING MANAGERS                                        organise, direct and co-ordinate the activities and
                                                                              resources of non-residential and residential public
                Restaurant and catering managers plan, direct and             houses and the bar and catering facilities at non-
                co-ordinate the catering services of restaurants,             residential clubs.
                hotels and other organisations.

  5                                                                           TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              No formal academic qualifications are required.
                Entry is possible with a variety of academic                  Relevant experience is advantageous and candidates
                qualifications and/or relevant experience. Larger
  6             restaurants and catering chains offer managerial
                                                                              must be over 18 years of age. Larger chains offer
                                                                              accelerated promotion for holders of degrees or
                trainee schemes. Candidates for these usually require
                a BTEC/SQA award, a degree or equivalent                      equivalent qualifications. Off- and on-the-job
                qualification, or a professional qualification. Off-          training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in On-Licensed
                and on-the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in             Premises Management are available at Level 4.
                Restaurant Management are available at Level 4.
  7
                                                                              TASKS
                TASKS
                                                                              • maintains financial records for the establishment;
                • plans catering services and directs junior staff;
                                                                              • arranges purchase of alcoholic and other
  8             • decides on range and quality of meals and                      beverages, bar snacks, cigarettes and other items
                     beverages to be provided or discusses customer's            and ensures that stocks are stored in proper
                     requirements for special occasions;                         conditions;



  9

                62       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• supervises bar, kitchen and cleaning staff and, if




                                                                                                                    Major Group 1
                                                          RELATED JOB TITLES
   necessary, assists with the serving of drinks;
                                                          Leisure centre manager
• observes licensing laws and other statutory             Manager (snooker, billiards hall)
   regulations and regulates behaviour of customers       Riding school owner
   as necessary.                                          Sports centre manager

RELATED JOB TITLES                                        1226 TRAVEL AGENCY
Club steward
                                                               MANAGERS
Licensee                                                  Travel agency managers plan, organise, direct and
Public house manager                                      co-ordinate the resources and activities of travel
Publican                                                  agencies and booking offices.                              1
1225 LEISURE AND SPORTS                                   TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
     MANAGERS                                             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Leisure and sports managers organise, direct and co-      Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades but is
                                                                                                                     2
ordinate the activities and resources required for the    possible with other academic qualifications and/or
provision of sporting, artistic, theatrical and other     relevant experience. Off- and on-the-job training is
recreational and amenity services.                        available. NVQs/SVQs in Travel Services are
                                                          available at Level 4.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                                                                             3
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                 TASKS
Both graduate and non-graduate entry is possible.         • plans work schedules and assigns tasks and
Employers are however increasingly seeking                   responsibilities;
applicants with BTEC/SQA awards, degrees or
equivalent qualifications. Off- and on-the-job training   • co-ordinates the activities of clerical, secretarial
                                                                                                                     4
is provided. NVQs/SVQs in Sports and Recreation              and other staff;
Management are available at Level 4. Professional
qualifications may also be required for some posts.       • discusses client's requirements and advises on
                                                             road, rail, air and sea travel and accommodation;

                                                          • makes and confirms travel and accommodation              5
TASKS
                                                             bookings, arranges group holidays, tours and
• recruits, supervises and trains box office staff,          individual itineraries;
   cashiers, gardeners, coaches, groundsmen/women;        • advises on currency and passport/visa regulations
                                                             and any necessary health precautions needed.
• ensures that facilities are kept clean and in good                                                                 6
   condition;

• keeps abreast of new trends and developments            RELATED JOB TITLES
   in the creative arts and arranges exhibitions,
   theatrical productions, bands, orchestras, etc.;       Manager (travel agents)

• advises on the facilities available and promotes
                                                          Travel manager                                             7
   publicity in relation to shows, games, races, new
   theme parks, etc.;

• checks and keeps custody of all cash receipts and
   makes regular stock checks.                                                                                       8


                                                                                                                     9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   63
Major Group 1



                                      MINOR GROUP 123
                          MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN OTHER SERVICE
                                         INDUSTRIES
                Workers in this minor group plan, co-ordinate and direct the activities and resources of
                property services, garages, hairdressers and other personal services, small shops, waste
                and recycling facilities, and other services not elsewhere classified in SUB-MAJOR GROUP
                12: Managers and Proprietors in Agriculture and Services.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
  1
                        1231 PROPERTY, HOUSING AND LAND MANAGERS
                        1232 GARAGE MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS
                        1233 HAIRDRESSING AND BEAUTY SALON MANAGERS AND
                             PROPRIETORS
  2                     1234 SHOPKEEPERS AND WHOLESALE/RETAIL DEALERS
                        1235 RECYCLING AND REFUSE DISPOSAL MANAGERS
                        1239 MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN OTHER SERVICES NEC

  3
                1231 PROPERTY, HOUSING AND                                       legal formalities with solicitors, building
                     LAND MANAGERS                                               societies and other parties;

                Workers within this unit group manage shopping                • maintains or arranges for the maintenance of
                                                                                 estate accounts and records;
  4             centres, residential areas and private estates, and
                arrange for the sale, purchase, rental and leasing of
                                                                              • acts as arbiter in disputes between landlord and
                property on behalf of clients and employers.
                                                                                 tenant and ensures that both fulfil their legal
                                                                                 obligations;
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              • examines and assesses housing applications,
  5             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                 advises on rent levels, investigates complaints,
                                                                                 maintains estate's amenities and liaises with
                There are no formal academic requirements,
                although entrants usually possess a BTEC/SQA                     tenants' association and social workers to resolve
                award, a degree or equivalent qualification. Many                any family problems.
                employers expect the attainment of membership to
  6             a professional body.                                          RELATED JOB TITLES

                TASKS                                                         Housing manager
                                                                              Property manager
                • discusses client's requirements and may advise              Shopping centre manager
  7                  client on the purchase of property and land for
                     investment and other purposes;
                                                                              1232 GARAGE MANAGERS AND
                • conducts or arranges for structural surveys of                   PROPRIETORS
                     properties and undertakes any necessary
                     valuations of property or agricultural land;             Garage managers and proprietors plan, organise,
  8             • negotiates land or property purchases and sales
                                                                              direct and co-ordinate the day-to-day running of
                                                                              garages and specialist vehicle maintenance and
                     or leases and tenancy agreements and arranges            repair establishments.



  9

                64       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                  Major Group 1
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                TASKS
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                        • determines staffing, financial, material and other
There are no pre-set entry requirements, although          short and long term needs;
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades or
Intermediate GNVQs/GSVQs Level II. Off- and on-         • controls the allocation, training and remuneration
                                                           of hairdressing, beauty treatment and health club
the-job training is provided.
                                                           staff;

                                                        • provides clients with information and resolves
TASKS                                                      any complaints or problems;
• ensures that necessary spare parts, materials and     • undertakes and/or directs hair treatments, beauty
   equipment are available or obtainable at short
   notice;
                                                           therapy or health and fitness activities;               1
                                                        • checks and maintains any health and fitness
• arranges for maintenance staff to perform                equipment, and ensures that all safety
   necessary maintenance and repair work on                requirements are met;
   vehicles or motorcycles;
                                                        • prepares estimates, financial statements and other
• checks completed work for compliance with                reports.
                                                                                                                   2
   safety and other statutory regulations;

• maintains records of repair work to detect            RELATED JOB TITLES
   recurrent faults;

• provides information about garage merchandise
                                                        Hairdresser's manager
                                                        Manager (hairdressing)
                                                                                                                   3
   for staff and customers.                             Owner (beauty salon)


RELATED JOB TITLES                                      1234 SHOPKEEPERS AND
Body shop manager (vehicle trades)
                                                             WHOLESALE/RETAIL                                      4
Garage manager                                               DEALERS
Garage owner
                                                        Workers in this unit group co-ordinate, direct and
Service manager (garage)
                                                        undertake the activities in the running of small
                                                        independent retail and wholesale establishments.
                                                                                                                   5
1233 HAIRDRESSING AND BEAUTY
                                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
     SALON MANAGERS AND
                                                        ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
     PROPRIETORS
Workers in this unit group plan, organise, direct and
                                                        There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                                                        There are a variety of NVQs/SVQs relevant to the
                                                                                                                   6
co-ordinate the activities and resources of             activities of specialist retail establishments. NVQs/
hairdressing salons, health clubs, beauty treatment     SVQs in Retail Operations are available at Levels
and similar establishments.                             2, 3 and 4.


TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                                                                   7
                                                        TASKS
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                        • provides information about merchandise to staff
No formal qualifications are required for entry.           and customers;
Candidates usually possess a BTEC/SQA award, an
NVQ/SVQ in Hairdressing at Level 3 and/or relevant      • ensures that adequate reserves of merchandise            8
experience.                                                are held and orders new stock as required;




                                                                                                                   9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   65
                • maintains financial and other shop records and
Major Group 1



                                                                              • studies legislation and liaises with waste
                     controls security arrangements for the premises;            enforcement regulation staff to ensure the
                                                                                 compliance with legislation regarding waste
                • authorises payment for supplies received and                   disposal and recycling;
                     decides on vending price and credit terms;
                                                                              • co-ordinates the resources and activities relating
                • examines quality of merchandise and ensures that               to the procurement, collection, storage,
                     effective use is made of advertising and display
                                                                                 processing and sale of scrap metal.
                     facilities.

                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                RELATED JOB TITLES
  1             General store keeper
                                                                              General dealer
                                                                              Manager (refuse disposal)
                Newsagent                                                     Recycling manager
                Off-licensee                                                  Scrap metal merchant
                Owner (butchers)

  2                                                                           1239 MANAGERS AND
                1235 RECYCLING AND REFUSE                                          PROPRIETORS IN OTHER
                     DISPOSAL MANAGERS                                             SERVICES NEC
                Recycling and refuse disposal managers plan,                  Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
  3             organise, direct and co-ordinate the operations and           managerial tasks in other service industries not
                                                                              elsewhere classified in MINOR GROUP 123:
                development of waste disposal and recycling
                facilities within private waste management firms or           Managers and Proprietors in Other Service Industries.
                public authorities.

                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  4             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              Entry requirements vary from company to company.
                Entry is possible with a variety of academic                  Some companies do not require candidates to have
                qualifications and/or relevant experience.                    academic qualifications but others require a degree
                Professional qualifications are available from the            or equivalent qualification. Off- and on-the-job
  5             Institute of Waste Management. Professional                   training is provided.
                qualifications may be mandatory in some operational
                management posts.
                                                                              TASKS

                TASKS                                                         • determines staffing, financial, material and other
  6                                                                              short and long term requirements;
                • delegates tasks to staff and co-ordinates the
                     maintenance and optimum utilisation of waste             • ensures that adequate reserves of merchandise
                     disposal and recycling equipment to provide an              are held and that stock keeping is carried out
                     efficient service;                                          efficiently;
  7             • monitors levels of waste disposal and recycling,            • authorises payment for supplies received and
                     compiles statistics and produces reports;                   decides on vending price and credit terms;

                • liaises with members of the local community to              • examines quality of merchandise and ensures that
                     educate and promote the concept of recycling                effective use is made of advertising and display
  8                  and appropriate waste management;                           facilities.




  9

                66       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                              Major Group 1
RELATED JOB TITLES

Betting shop manager
Citizens Advice Bureau manager
Crematorium manager
Domestic services manager
Hire shop manager
Library Manager
Plant hire manager
Production manager (broadcasting)
Publisher's manager
Video shop owner
                                                                                               1


                                                                                               2


                                                                                               3


                                                                                               4


                                                                                               5


                                                                                               6


                                                                                               7


                                                                                               8


                                                                                               9

                                    Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   67
                                                                                                            Major Group 2
                         MAJOR GROUP 2
                    PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATIONS
This major group covers occupations whose main tasks require a high level of knowledge
and experience in the natural sciences, engineering, life sciences, social sciences, humanities
and related fields. The main tasks consist of the practical application of an extensive body
of theoretical knowledge, increasing the stock of knowledge by means of research and
communicating such knowledge by teaching methods and other means.


Most occupations in this major group will require a degree or equivalent qualification,                      1
with some occupations requiring postgraduate qualifications and/or a formal period of
experience-related training.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:
                                                                                                             2
21 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROFESSIONALS
    211    SCIENCE PROFESSIONALS
    212    ENGINEERING PROFESSIONALS                                                                         3
    213    INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
           PROFESSIONALS

22 HEALTH PROFESSIONALS                                                                                      4
    221    HEALTH PROFESSIONALS

23 TEACHING AND RESEARCH PROFESSIONALS
    231    TEACHING PROFESSIONALS                                                                            5
    232    RESEARCH PROFESSIONALS

24 BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE PROFESSIONALS
    241    LEGAL PROFESSIONALS
                                                                                                             6
    242    BUSINESS AND STATISTICAL PROFESSIONALS
    243    ARCHITECTS, TOWN PLANNERS, SURVEYORS
    244    PUBLIC SERVICE PROFESSIONALS
    245    LIBRARIANS AND RELATED PROFESSIONALS
                                                                                                             7


                                                                                                             8


                                                                                                             9

                                                  Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   69
Major Group 2



                                   SUB-MAJOR GROUP 21
                         SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROFESSIONALS
                Science and technology professionals undertake research and consultancy activities within
                the physical sciences; technically supervise the development, installation and maintenance
                of mechanical, chemical, structural and electrical systems; advise upon and direct the
                technical aspects of production programmes; and provide consultancy and development
                services in the provision and utilisation of information technology.


  1                                                   MINOR GROUP 211
                                                   SCIENCE PROFESSIONALS
                Science professionals are involved in planning, directing and undertaking research and
                development, providing, technical, advisory and consultancy services in the fields of
  2             chemistry, biological sciences, physics, geology and meteorology.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                        2111 CHEMISTS
  3                     2112 BIOLOGICAL SCIENTISTS AND BIOCHEMISTS
                        2113 PHYSICISTS, GEOLOGISTS AND METEOROLOGISTS


                2111 CHEMISTS                                                    composition, energy and chemical changes in
  4                                                                              natural substances and processed materials;
                Chemists analyse and research physical aspects of
                chemical structure and change within substances and           • analyses results and experimental data;
                develop chemical techniques used in the manufacture
                or modification of natural substances and processed
                                                                              • tests techniques and processes for reliability
                                                                                 under a variety of conditions;
  5             products.
                                                                              • develops procedures for quality control of
                                                                                 manufactured products.
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
  6             Entrants usually possess a degree. Entry may also
                be possible with an appropriate BTEC/SQA award,               Analytical chemist
                an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, or other                     Chemist
                academic qualifications. Further specialist training          Development chemist
                is provided on the job. Some employers may expect             Industrial chemist
                                                                              Physical chemist
  7             entrants to gain professional qualifications.
                                                                              Research chemist


                TASKS
                                                                              2112 BIOLOGICAL SCIENTISTS
                • develops experimental procedures, instruments                    AND BIOCHEMISTS
  8                  and recording and testing systems;
                                                                              Biological scientists and biochemists examine and
                • conducts experiments to identify chemical                   investigate the morphology, structure, chemistry and



  9

                70       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                  Major Group 2
physical characteristics of living organisms,           2113 PHYSICISTS, GEOLOGISTS
including their inter-relationships, environments and
                                                             AND METEOROLOGISTS
diseases.
                                                        Physicists, geologists and meteorologists study
                                                        relationships between matter, energy and other
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                physical phenomena, the nature, composition and
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                               structure of the Earth and other planetary bodies and
                                                        forecast weather conditions and electrical, magnetic,
Entrants usually possess a degree. Entry may also
                                                        seismic and thermal activity.
be possible with an appropriate BTEC/SQA award,
an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, or other
academic qualifications. Further specialist training
is provided on the job. Some employers may expect       TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
entrants to gain professional qualifications.           ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                  1
                                                        Entrants usually possess a degree, although entry
TASKS                                                   may also be possible with an appropriate BTEC/SQA
                                                        award. Further specialist training is provided on the
• studies the physical and chemical form, structure,
   composition and function of organs and tissues;
                                                        job. Higher degrees and professional qualifications
                                                        are available.
                                                                                                                   2
• identifies and studies the chemical substances,
   including microbial infections, involved in
   physiological processes and the progress of          TASKS
   disease;
• performs blood tests to study physiological and       • conducts experiments and tests and uses                  3
                                                           mathematical models and theories to investigate
   pathological characteristics within blood cells;
                                                           the structure and properties of matter,
• researches the effects of internal and external          transformations and propagations of energy, the
   environmental factors on the life processes and         behaviour of macro-molecules and living cells
   other functions of living organisms;                    and their interaction with various forms of
                                                           energy;
                                                                                                                   4
• observes the structure of communities of
   organisms in the laboratory and in their natural     • uses surveys, seismology and other methods to
   environment;                                            determine the earth's mantle, crust, rock structure
                                                           and type, and to analyse and predict the
• advises farmers, medical staff and others, on the
   nature of field crops, livestock and produce and
                                                           occurrence of seismological activity;                   5
   on the treatment and prevention of disease;          • observes, records and collates data on
                                                           atmospheric conditions from weather stations,
• monitors the distribution, presence and behaviour        satellites, and observation vessels to plot and
   of plants, animals and aquatic life, and performs       forecast weather conditions;
   other scientific tasks related to conservation not
   performed by workers in UNIT GROUP 3551:             • applies mathematical models and techniques to
                                                                                                                   6
   Conservation and Environmental Protection               assist in the solution of scientific problems in
   Officers.                                               industry and commerce and seeks out new
                                                           applications of mathematical analysis.

RELATED JOB TITLES                                                                                                 7
Biochemist
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES
Biologist                                               Geologist
Botanist                                                Geophysicist
Medical laboratory scientific officer                   Mathematician
Microbiologist                                          Meteorologist                                              8
Pathologist                                             Physicist
Zoologist                                               Seismologist



                                                                                                                   9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   71
Major Group 2



                                                  MINOR GROUP 212
                                             ENGINEERING PROFESSIONALS
                Engineering professionals plan, organise and technically supervise the construction, testing,
                installation and maintenance of mechanical, structural, chemical, electrical and electronic
                systems and equipment, advise and direct technical aspects of production programmes,
                and plan production schedules and work procedures to ensure efficiency and quality.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                        2121    CIVIL ENGINEERS
  1
                        2122    MECHANICAL ENGINEERS
                        2123    ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS
                        2124    ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS
  2                     2125    CHEMICAL ENGINEERS
                        2126    DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERS
                        2127    PRODUCTION AND PROCESS ENGINEERS
                        2128    PLANNING AND QUALITY CONTROL ENGINEERS
  3                     2129    ENGINEERING PROFESSIONALS NEC


                2121 CIVIL ENGINEERS                                          • determines and specifies construction methods,
                                                                                 materials, quality and safety standards and
                Civil engineers undertake research and design, direct            ensures that equipment operation and
  4             construction and manage the operation and                        maintenance comply with design specifications;
                maintenance of civil and mining engineering structures.
                                                                              • designs structures such as roads, dams, bridges,
                                                                                 railways, hydraulic systems, sewerage systems,
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                         industrial and other buildings and plans the layout
  5             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                        of tunnels, wells and construction shafts;

                Civil engineers usually possess an accredited three or        • organises and plans projects, arranges work
                four-year degree in civil engineering or engineering             schedules, carries out inspection work and plans
                science or an accredited Higher National Diploma or              maintenance control;
                Certificate. The status of 'chartered engineer' is
  6             achieved through the completion of postgraduate               • organises and establishes control systems to
                training and membership of a chartered engineering               monitor operational efficiency and performance
                institution. The status of 'incorporated engineer' is            of materials and systems.
                obtained upon the completion of further training at
                work and associate membership of a chartered
  7             engineering institution.
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES

                TASKS                                                         City engineer
                                                                              Civil engineer
                • undertakes research and advises on mineral                  Mining engineer
  8                  deposits, soil mechanics, concrete technology,           Municipal engineer
                     hydraulics, water and waste water treatment              Petroleum engineer
                     processes and other civil engineering matters;           Structural engineer



  9

                72       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                Major Group 2
2122 MECHANICAL ENGINEERS                             2123 ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS
Mechanical engineers undertake research and design,   Electrical engineers undertake research and design,
direct the manufacture and manage the operation and   direct construction and manage the operation and
maintenance of engines, machines, aircraft, vehicle   maintenance of electrical equipment, power stations
and ships' structures and other mechanical items.     and other electrical products and systems.



TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Mechanical engineers usually possess an accredited    Electrical engineers usually possess an accredited
university degree. After qualifying, periods of       university degree. After qualifying, periods of            1
appropriate training and experience are required      appropriate training and experience are required
before membership of a chartered engineering          before membership of a chartered engineering
institution. Incorporated engineers possess an        institution. Incorporated engineers possess an
accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA award or       accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA award or
a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an NVQ/SVQ         a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an NVQ/SVQ
at Level 4, followed by periods of training and       at Level 4. All routes are followed by periods of          2
relevant experience.                                  appropriate training and relevant experience.



TASKS                                                 TASKS
                                                                                                                 3
• undertakes research and advises on energy use,      • supervises, controls and monitors the operation
   materials handling, thermodynamic processes,          of electrical generation, transmission and
   fluid mechanics, vehicles and environmental           distribution systems;
   controls;
                                                      • determines and specifies manufacturing methods
• determines materials, equipment, piping,               of electrical systems;                                  4
   capacities, layout of plant or system and
   specification for manufacture;                     • ensures that manufacture, operation and
                                                         maintenance comply with design specifications
• designs mechanical equipment, such as steam,           and contractual arrangements;
   internal combustion and other non-electrical
   motors for railway locomotives, road vehicles,     • organises and establishes control systems to
                                                         monitor the performance and safety of electrical
                                                                                                                 5
   aeroplanes and other machinery;
                                                         assemblies and systems.
• ensures that equipment, operation and
   maintenance comply with design specifications
   and safety standards;                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                 6
• organises and establishes control systems to
   monitor operational efficiency and performance     Electrical engineer (professional)
   of materials and systems.                          Generating engineer (electricity supplier)
                                                      Power engineer
                                                      Power transmission engineer
                                                                                                                 7
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                      2124 ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS
Aeronautical engineer (professional)
Automobile engineer (professional)                    Electronics engineers undertake research and design,
Hydraulic engineer (professional)                     direct construction and manage the operation and
Marine engineer (professional)                        maintenance of electronic motors, communications           8
Mechanical engineer (professional)                    systems, microwave systems, and other electronic
Welding engineer (professional)                       equipment.



                                                                                                                 9

                                                      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   73
Major Group 2


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      appropriate training and experience are required
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     before membership of a chartered engineering
                                                                              institution. Incorporated engineers possess an
                Electronics engineers usually possess an accredited           accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA award or
                university degree. After qualifying, periods of               a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an NVQ/SVQ
                appropriate training and experience are required              at Level 4. All routes are followed by periods of
                before membership of a chartered engineering                  appropriate training and relevant experience.
                institution. Incorporated engineers possess an
                accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA award or
                a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an NVQ/SVQ                 TASKS
                at Level 4. All routes are followed by periods of
                appropriate training and relevant experience.                 • undertakes research and develops processes to
  1                                                                              achieve physical and/or chemical change for oil,
                                                                                 pharmaceutical, synthetic, plastic, food and other
                TASKS                                                            products;

                • undertakes research and advises on all aspects              • designs, controls and constructs process plants
                     of telecommunications equipment, radar,                     to manufacture products;
  2                  telemetry and remote control systems, data
                                                                              • ensures that production methods, materials and
                     processing equipment, microwaves and other
                     electronic equipment;                                       quality standards conform to specifications and
                                                                                 safety requirements;
                • determines and specifies appropriate production
                     and/or installation methods and quality and safety       • manages the safe and efficient operation,
  3                  standards;                                                  maintenance and control of processing plant;

                • organises and establishes control systems to                • prepares reports, feasibility studies and costings
                     monitor performance and evaluate designs;                   for major investments in processing facilities for
                                                                                 increased capacity and novel product
                • tests, diagnoses faults and undertakes repair of               manufacture.
  4                  electronic equipment.

                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              Chemical engineer
                Broadcasting engineer (professional)
                                                                              Plastics engineer (professional)
  5             Electronics engineer (professional)
                Microwave engineer
                Radar engineer (research)
                Radio engineer (professional)                                 2126 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                   ENGINEERS
  6             2125 CHEMICAL ENGINEERS                                       Design and development engineers conceive
                                                                              engineering designs from product ideas or
                Chemical engineers undertake research on                      requirements in mechanical, electrical and electronic
                commercial scale chemical processes and processed             engineering.
                products, design and provide specifications and
  7             direct the construction, operation, maintenance and
                repair of chemical plants and control systems.                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      Design and development engineers usually possess
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     an accredited university degree. After qualifying,
  8                                                                           periods of appropriate training and experience are
                Chemical engineers usually possess an accredited              required before membership of a chartered
                university degree. After qualifying, periods of               engineering institution. Incorporated engineers



  9

                74       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                  Major Group 2
possess an accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA       award or a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an
award or a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an          NVQ/SVQ at Level 4. All routes are followed by
NVQ/SVQ at Level 4. All routes are followed by          periods of appropriate training and relevant
periods of appropriate training and relevant            experience.
experience.

                                                        TASKS
TASKS
                                                        • studies existing and alternative production
• assesses product requirements, including costs,          methods, regarding work flow, plant layout, types
   manufacturing feasibility            and market         of machinery and cost;
   requirements;

• prepares working designs for steam, aero,
                                                        • recommends optimum equipment and layout and
                                                           prepares drawings and specifications;
                                                                                                                   1
   turbine, marine and electrical engines,
   mechanical instruments, aircraft and missile         • devises production control methods to monitor
   structures, vehicle and ship structures, plant and      operational efficiency;
   machinery equipment, domestic electrical
                                                        • investigates and eliminates potential hazards and
   appliances and electronic computing and
                                                           bottlenecks in production;
                                                                                                                   2
   telecommunications equipment;
                                                        • advises management on new production
• arranges construction and testing of model or            methods, techniques and equipment;
   prototype and modifies design if necessary;
                                                        • liaises with materials buying, storing and
• produces final design information for use in             controlling departments to ensure a steady flow         3
   preparation of layouts, parts lists, etc.;              of supplies.
• prepares specifications for materials and other
   components.
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                   4
RELATED JOB TITLES                                      Process engineer
                                                        Production consultant
Design consultant                                       Production engineer
Design engineer
Development engineer
                                                        2128 PLANNING AND QUALITY
                                                                                                                   5
                                                             CONTROL ENGINEERS
2127 PRODUCTION AND PROCESS
     ENGINEERS                                          Planning and quality control engineers plan
                                                        production schedules, work sequences, and
Production and process engineers advise on and          manufacturing and processing procedures to ensure          6
direct technical aspects of production programmes       accuracy, quality and reliability.
to ensure cost-effectiveness and efficiency.

                                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                  7
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                        Planning and quality control engineers usually
Production and process engineers usually possess        possess an accredited university degree. After
an accredited university degree. After qualifying,      qualifying, periods of appropriate training and
periods of appropriate training and experience are      experience are required before membership of a
required before membership of a chartered               chartered engineering institution. Incorporated            8
engineering institution. Incorporated engineers         engineers possess an accredited university degree,
possess an accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA       BTEC/SQA award or a Modern Apprenticeship



                                                                                                                   9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   75
Major Group 2


                leading to an NVQ/SVQ at Level 4. All routes are              before membership of a chartered engineering
                followed by periods of appropriate training and               institution. Incorporated engineers possess an
                relevant experience.                                          accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA award or
                                                                              a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an NVQ/SVQ
                                                                              at Level 4. All routes are followed by periods of
                TASKS                                                         appropriate training and relevant experience.

                • analyses plans, drawings, specifications and
                     safety, quality, accuracy, reliability and               TASKS
                     contractual requirements;
                                                                              • researches into problem areas to advance basic
                • prepares plan of sequence of operations and                    knowledge, evaluate new theories and techniques
  1                  completion dates for each phase of production
                     or processing;
                                                                                 and to solve specific problems;

                                                                              • establishes principles and techniques to improve
                • advises on existing plant machinery/layout and                 the quality, durability and performance of
                     any modifications required;                                 materials such as textiles, glass, rubber, plastics,
                                                                                 ceramics, metals and alloys;
                • devises inspection, testing and evaluation
  2                  methods for bought-in materials, components,             • designs new systems and equipment with regard
                     semi-finished and finished products;                        to cost, market requirements and feasibility of
                • ensures accuracy of machines, jigs, fixtures,                  manufacture;
                     gauges and other manufacturing and testing               • devises and implements control systems to
                     equipment;
  3                                                                              monitor operational efficiency and performance
                • prepares work flow charts for individual                       of system and materials;
                     departments and compiles detailed instructions           • prepare sketches, drawings and specifications
                     on processes, work methods and quality and                  showing materials to be used, construction and
                     safety standards for workers.                               finishing methods and other details;
  4                                                                           • examines and advises on patent applications;
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            • provides technical consultancy services.
                Industrial engineer
                Planning engineer
  5             Production planner                                            RELATED JOB TITLES
                Quality control engineer
                Quality engineer                                              Agricultural engineer
                                                                              Ceramics engineer
                                                                              Food technologist
                                                                              Fuel engineer
  6             2129 ENGINEERING                                              Materials scientist
                     PROFESSIONALS NEC                                        Metallurgist
                                                                              Patent agent
                Workers in this unit group perform a variety of               Project engineer
                engineering functions not elsewhere classified in             Traffic engineer
                MINOR GROUP 212: Engineering Professionals.
  7
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

  8             Chartered engineers usually possess an accredited
                university degree. After qualifying, periods of
                appropriate training and experience are required



  9

                76       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 2
                     MINOR GROUP 213
       INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
                     PROFESSIONALS
Information and communication technology professionals advise clients as to the effective
utilisation of information technology and develop and implement software for clients.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       2131 IT STRATEGY AND PLANNING PROFESSIONALS
       2132 SOFTWARE PROFESSIONALS                                                                                  1

2131 IT STRATEGY AND                                     RELATED JOB TITLES
     PLANNING PROFESSIONALS
                                                         Computer consultant                                        2
IT strategy and planning professionals provide advice    Software consultant
on the effective utilisation of information technology
in order to solve business problems or to enhance
the effectiveness of business functions.                 2132 SOFTWARE PROFESSIONALS
                                                         Software professionals are responsible for all aspects     3
                                                         of the design, application, development and
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                         operation of software systems.
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent
qualification, although entry with other academic        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                    4
qualifications and/or relevant experience is possible.
There are a variety of vocational, professional and
                                                         Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent
postgraduate qualifications available.
                                                         qualification, although entry with other academic
                                                         qualifications and/or relevant experience is possible.

TASKS
                                                         There are a variety of vocational, professional and
                                                         postgraduate qualifications available.
                                                                                                                    5
• liaises with clients in order to analyse business
   procedure, clarify customer requirements and to       TASKS
   define the scope of existing software, hardware
   and network arrangements;                             • examines existing software and determines                6
• undertakes feasibility studies incorporating costs,       requirements for new/modified systems through
   benefits, staffing implications and training needs,      consultation with clients and staff;
   and presents proposals to clients to introduce new    • undertakes feasibility studies of software
   IT solutions or to modify existing systems;              solutions through specifying and costing
• communicates the impact of emerging
                                                            functional details, equipment, staffing and             7
                                                            operational procedures;
   technologies to clients and advises upon the
   potential introduction of such technology;            • investigates, plans, designs and develops
                                                            software solutions within stated constraints;
• provides advice and assistance in the
   procurement, provision, delivery, installation,       • installs, implements and maintains the reliability       8
   maintenance and use of information systems and           and security of software systems as business
   their environments.                                      functions;



                                                                                                                    9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   77
                • writes operational documentation and provides
Major Group 2



                     subsequent support and training for users.



                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Analyst-programmer
                Computer programmer
                Software engineer
                Systems analyst
                Systems designer

  1


  2


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                78       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                 Major Group 2
                             SUB-MAJOR GROUP 22
                            HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
Health professionals provide medical treatment for people and animals, conduct research
into treatment and drugs, and dispense pharmaceutical compounds.


                                  MINOR GROUP 221
                               HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
Health professionals diagnose mental and physical injuries, disorders and diseases, provide                       1
treatment with drugs, surgery, therapy and corrective devices, carry out routine medical
tests and recommend preventative action to patients, conduct research into treatments and
drugs, dispense pharmaceutical compounds, and diagnose and treat sick or injured animals.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
                                                                                                                  2
       2211   MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS
       2212   PSYCHOLOGISTS
       2213   PHARMACISTS/PHARMACOLOGISTS
       2214   OPHTHALMIC OPTICIANS
                                                                                                                  3
       2215   DENTAL PRACTITIONERS
       2216   VETERINARIANS

                                                                                                                  4
2211 MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS                             • diagnoses condition and prescribes and/or
                                                          administers appropriate treatment/surgery;
Medical practitioners diagnose mental and physical
injuries, disorders and diseases, prescribe and give   • administers routine medical tests and
                                                          inoculations against communicable diseases;
                                                                                                                  5
treatment, recommend preventative action and where
necessary, refer the patient to a specialist.
                                                       • supervises patient's progress and advises on diet,
                                                          exercise and other preventative action;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                               • refers patient to specialist where necessary and         6
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                 liaises with specialist;

Entrants require a university degree from a medical    • prepares and delivers lectures, undertakes
school recognised by the General Medical Council          research, and conducts and participates in clinical
followed by a year of pre-registration training as a      trials.
house officer. Once the pre-registration period is
completed, doctors undertake up to two years
                                                                                                                  7
postgraduate training in a chosen speciality.          RELATED JOB TITLES

                                                       Anaesthetist
TASKS                                                  Consultant (hospital service)
                                                       Doctor                                                     8
• examines patient, arranges for any necessary         General practitioner
   x-rays or other tests and interprets results;       Medical practitioner



                                                                                                                  9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   79
Major Group 2


                Physician                                                     compound and dispense drugs and medicaments in
                Psychiatrist                                                  hospitals and pharmacies.
                Psycho-analyst
                Registrar (hospital service)
                Surgeon                                                       TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                2212 PSYCHOLOGISTS                                            Entrants possess a degree in pharmacy. To register
                                                                              with the Royal Pharmaceutical Society, entrants must
                Psychologists study and assess emotional, cognitive
                                                                              have completed a one year period of training and
                and behavioural processes and abnormalities in
                human beings and animals and how these are affected           passed a registration exam.
                by genetic, physical and social factors.
  1                                                                           TASKS
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              • prepares or directs the preparation of prescribed
                                                                                 medicaments in liquid, powder, tablet, ointment
                Entrants require a degree in psychology recognised               or other form;
  2             by the British Psychology Society. A variety of
                                                                              • checks that recommended doses are not being
                postgraduate and professional qualifications relating
                to different areas of psychology are available and               exceeded and that instructions are understood by
                may be required for certain posts.                               patients;

                                                                              • maintains prescription files and records issue of
                                                                                 narcotics, poisons and other habit-forming drugs;
  3             TASKS
                                                                              • liaises with other professionals regarding the
                • develops and administers tests to measure                      development, manufacturing and testing of drugs;
                     intelligence, abilities, aptitudes, etc. and assesses
                     results;                                                 • tests and analyses drugs to determine their
                                                                                 identity, purity and strength;
  4             • develops treatment and guidance methods and
                     gives treatment or guidance using a variety of           • ensures that drugs and medicaments are in good
                     therapy and counselling techniques;                         supply and are stored properly.
                • observes and experiments on humans and animals
                     to measure mental and physical characteristics;
  5             • analyses the effect of hereditary, social and
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES

                     physical factors on thought and behaviour;               Chemist (pharmaceutical/retail)
                                                                              Druggist
                • studies psychological factors in the treatment and          Pharmaceutical chemist
                     prevention of mental illness or emotional and            Pharmacist
  6                  personality disorders.                                   Pharmacologist


                RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              2214 OPHTHALMIC OPTICIANS
                Clinical psychologist                                         Ophthalmic opticians test patient's vision, diagnose
  7             Psychologist                                                  defects and disorders and prescribe glasses or contact
                Psychometrist                                                 lenses as required.


                2213 PHARMACISTS/                                             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                     PHARMACOLOGISTS                                          ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  8
                Pharmacists/pharmacologists advise and participate            Entrants require a degree in Optometry and must have
                in the development and testing of new drugs and               passed the Professional Qualifying Examination of the


  9

                80       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                           • refers patient to specialist, where necessary;




                                                                                                                     Major Group 2
College of Optometrists. Advanced training in
specialised areas is available.
                                                           • prepares and delivers lectures, undertakes
                                                              research, and conducts and participates in clinical
                                                              trials.
TASKS

• examines eyes and tests vision of patient;
                                                           RELATED JOB TITLES
• prescribes, supplies and fits appropriate spectacle
   lenses, contact lenses or other aids;                   Dental surgeon
• advises patient on proper use of glasses, contact        Dentist
   lenses and other aids, and on appropriate lighting      Orthodontist
   conditions for reading and working;                     Periodontist                                               1
• refers patient to a specialist, where necessary;
• carries out research with glass and lens                 2216 VETERINARIANS
   manufacturers.
                                                           Veterinarians diagnose and treat animal injuries,
                                                           diseases and disorders, and advise on preventative         2
                                                           action.
RELATED JOB TITLES

Ophthalmic optician
Optometrist                                                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                           ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                  3
2215 DENTAL PRACTITIONERS                                  Entrants will require a university degree in veterinary
                                                           science. Pre-entry experience in a veterinary practice
Dental practitioners diagnose dental and oral              may be required for entry to a university veterinary
diseases, injuries and disorders, prescribe and            school.
administer treatment, recommend preventative action                                                                   4
and, where necessary, refer the patient to a specialist.
                                                           TASKS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                   • examines animal and arranges or undertakes any
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     necessary x-ray or other tests;                         5
Entrants require a university degree and must have         • diagnoses condition and prescribes and
completed a period of postgraduate vocational                 administers appropriate drugs, dressings, etc.;
training. Specialist fields require further study and
training.                                                  • performs routine medical tests and inoculates
                                                              animals against communicable diseases;                  6
                                                           • administers local or general anaesthetics and
TASKS                                                         performs surgery;
• examines patient's teeth, gums and jaw, using            • investigates outbreaks of animal diseases and
   dental and x-ray equipment;                                advises owners on feeding, breeding and general
                                                              care.
                                                                                                                      7
• administers local or general anaesthetics;
• drills, prepares and fills cavities in teeth;
• constructs and fits braces, inlays, dentures and         RELATED JOB TITLES
   other appliances;
                                                           Veterinarian                                               8
• supervises patient's progress and advises on             Veterinary officer
   preventative action;                                    Veterinary surgeon



                                                                                                                      9

                                                           Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   81
Major Group 2



                                  SUB-MAJOR GROUP 23
                         TEACHING AND RESEARCH PROFESSIONALS
                Job holders in this sub-major group plan, organise and undertake teaching and research
                activities within educational establishments, and inspect schools and training establishments.


                                                    MINOR GROUP 231
                                                TEACHING PROFESSIONALS

  1             Teaching professionals plan, organise and provide instruction in academic, technical,
                vocational, diversionary and other subjects and inspect schools and training establishments.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

  2                    2311 HIGHER EDUCATION TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
                       2312 FURTHER EDUCATION TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
                       2313 EDUCATION OFFICERS, SCHOOL INSPECTORS
                       2314 SECONDARY EDUCATION TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
  3                    2315 PRIMARY AND NURSERY EDUCATION TEACHING
                            PROFESSIONALS
                       2316 SPECIAL NEEDS EDUCATION TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
                       2317 REGISTRARS AND SENIOR ADMINISTRATORS OF
                            EDUCATIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS
  4
                       2319 TEACHING PROFESSIONALS NEC



  5             2311 HIGHER EDUCATION                                        TASKS
                     TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
                                                                             • prepares, delivers and directs lectures, seminars
                Higher education teaching professionals deliver                 and tutorials;
                lectures and teach students to at least first degree
                level, undertake research and write journal articles
                                                                             • prepares, administers and marks examinations,
  6             and books in their chosen field of study.
                                                                                essays and other assignments;

                                                                             • advises students on academic matters and
                                                                                encourages independent research;
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                    • participates in decision making processes
  7                                                                             regarding curricula, budgetary, departmental and
                Entry will require a good honours first degree plus a           other matters;
                higher degree or an equivalent professional                  • directs the work of postgraduate students;
                qualification. For vocational subjects, practical
                experience and additional qualifications may also            • undertakes research, writes articles and books
                be required.
  8                                                                             and attends conferences and other meetings.




  9

                82      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 2
RELATED JOB TITLES                                       2313 EDUCATION OFFICERS,
                                                              SCHOOL INSPECTORS
Lecturer (higher education, university)
Polytechnic lecturer                                     Education officers plan, organise and direct the
Professor (university)                                   educational activities and resources in a local
Reader                                                   authority education area, and undertake inspections
University lecturer                                      of schools and other training establishments
                                                         excluding universities.


2312 FURTHER EDUCATION                                   TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
     TEACHING PROFESSIONALS                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Further education teaching professionals supervise       Education officers usually posses an education-
                                                                                                                    1
and teach trade, technical, commercial, adult            related degree or postgraduate qualification and have
education, secondary and post-secondary courses to       gained relevant experience in teaching and/or school
students beyond minimum school leaving age.              management. School inspectors must have
                                                         completed a training and assessment programme in
                                                         school inspection.
                                                                                                                    2
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                TASKS
Further education lecturers will usually possess a       • advises on all aspects of education and ensures
professional or academic qualification in the subject
area they intend to teach, plus relevant professional,
                                                            that all statutory educational requirements are         3
                                                            being met;
industrial or business experience. Many employers
require entrants to possess teaching qualifications.     • plans and advises on the provision of special
                                                            schools for the physically and mentally
                                                            handicapped;

TASKS                                                    • appoints and controls teaching staff;                    4
• prepares, delivers and directs lectures, seminars      • verifies that school buildings are adequately
                                                            maintained;
   and tutorials;
                                                         • arranges for the provision of school medical and
• prepares, administers and marks examinations,             meals services;                                         5
   essays and other assignments;
                                                         • observes teaching, assesses learning level and
• arranges instructional visits and periods of              discusses any apparent faults with teachers, heads
   employment experience for students;                      of department and head teachers;
• assists with the administration of teaching and        • prepares reports on schools concerning teaching
   the arranging of timetables;                             standards, educational standards being achieved,
                                                                                                                    6
                                                            the spiritual, moral and social development of
• liaises with other professional and commercial            pupils, resource management etc.
   organisations to review course content.


                                                         RELATED JOB TITLES                                         7
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                         Curriculum development officer
College lecturer                                         Director of education
Lecturer                                                 Education inspector
Lecturer (further education)                             Education officer
Teacher (further education)                              HM Inspector of Schools                                    8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   83
Major Group 2



                2314 SECONDARY EDUCATION                                      TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                     TEACHING PROFESSIONALS                                   ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Secondary (and middle school deemed secondary)                Entry is only possible with a Bachelor of Education
                education teaching professionals plan, organise and           or other relevant degree followed by a Postgraduate
                provide instruction in one or more subjects, including        Certificate of Education. Further and higher
                physical education and diversionary activities, within        professional qualifications are required for some
                a prescribed curriculum in a secondary or secondary/          teaching posts.
                middle school.

                                                                              TASKS
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  1             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              • prepares courses and teaches a range of subjects;
                                                                              • prepares, assigns and corrects exercises to record
                Entry is only possible with a Bachelor of Education              and evaluate students progress;
                or other relevant degree followed by a Postgraduate
                Certificate of Education. Further and higher                  • supervises students in classroom and maintains
                professional qualifications are required for some                discipline;
  2             teaching posts.
                                                                              • teaches simple songs and rhymes and reads
                                                                                 stories to promote language development;
                TASKS                                                         • discusses progress with student, parents and/or
                                                                                 other education professionals.
  3             • prepares courses in accordance with curriculum
                     requirements and teaches one or more subjects;

                • prepares, assigns and corrects exercises and                RELATED JOB TITLES
                     examinations to record and evaluate students'
                     progress;                                                Head teacher (primary/middle school)
                                                                              Infant teacher
  4             • supervises any practical work and maintains                 Junior school teacher
                     classroom discipline;                                    Nursery school teacher
                                                                              Primary school teacher
                • discusses progress with student, parents and/or
                     other education professionals;
  5             • assists with or plans and develops curriculum and           2316 SPECIAL NEEDS EDUCATION
                     rota of teaching duties.                                      TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
                                                                              Special needs education teaching professionals
                                                                              organise and provide instruction at a variety of
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            different levels to children who are partially blind,
  6                                                                           deaf, physically or mentally handicapped, epileptic
                Head teacher (secondary school)                               or suffering from speech defects or other learning
                Secondary school teacher                                      difficulties.
                Teacher (secondary school)


  7             2315 PRIMARY AND NURSERY
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                     EDUCATION TEACHING
                     PROFESSIONALS                                            Entry is only possible with a Bachelor of Education
                                                                              or other relevant degree followed by a Postgraduate
                Primary (and middle school deemed primary) and                Certificate of Education. Further training for
  8             nursery education teaching professionals plan,                specialist needs teaching is available for those with
                organise and provide instruction to children at all           sufficient teaching experience and is mandatory in
                levels up to the age of entry into secondary education.       many areas.



  9

                84       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                          • arranges for evaluation of management,




                                                                                                                    Major Group 2
TASKS
                                                             accounting, information storage and retrieval and
• assesses student's abilities and needs and devises         other facilities;
   curriculum and rota of teaching duties
   accordingly;                                           • controls administrative aspects of student
                                                             registration and admission;
• gives instruction, using techniques appropriate
   to the student's handicap;                             • acts as secretary to statutory and other bodies/
                                                             committees associated with the educational
• encourages the student to develop self-help skills         establishment;
   to circumvent the limitations imposed by their
   disability;                                            • organises examinations, necessary invigilations
                                                             and any security procedures required;
• prepares, assigns and corrects exercises to record
   and evaluate students progress;                        • arranges for the preparation, publication and            1
                                                             despatch of syllabuses and other official
• supervises students in classroom and maintains             documents.
   discipline;

• discusses student's progress with parents and
   other staff.                                           RELATED JOB TITLES                                         2
                                                          Bursar
                                                          Registrar (educational services)
RELATED JOB TITLES                                        University administrator
Head teacher (special school)                                                                                        3
Special needs teacher
Teacher (special school)                                  2319 TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
                                                               NEC
                                                          Workers in this unit group perform a variety of other
2317 REGISTRARS AND SENIOR                                education and teaching occupations not elsewhere
                                                          classified in MINOR GROUP 231: Teaching
                                                                                                                     4
     ADMINISTRATORS OF
                                                          Professionals.
     EDUCATIONAL
     ESTABLISHMENTS
Workers in this unit group plan, organise, direct and     TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
co-ordinate the administrative work and financial         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                  5
resources of a university, college or other educational   Entry is possible with a variety of academic
establishment.                                            qualifications, professional qualifications and/or
                                                          relevant experience.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                                                                             6
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                 TASKS

Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent           • inspects and advises on the work of educational,
qualification and have gained relevant experience            training and similar establishments;
in the field of education. Specialist training courses
and professional qualifications are available.            • designs and implements methods of assessing the          7
                                                             performance of students, co-ordinates and
                                                             undertakes the evaluation of assessments and
                                                             awards grades of merit based upon performance;
TASKS
                                                          • co-ordinates the activities of private music and
• considers staffing, financial, material and other          dancing schools, training centres and similar           8
   short and long term needs;                                establishments;




                                                                                                                     9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   85
                • provides private academic, vocational and other
Major Group 2



                     instruction to individuals or groups;

                • teaches English as a foreign language and assists
                     in the tuition of foreign languages.



                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Examiner (examination board)
                Nursery manager (day nursery)
                Owner (children's nursery)
  1             Principal (dancing school/evening institute)
                Private tutor
                Teacher of English as a foreign language
                TEFL


  2


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                86       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 2
                                  MINOR GROUP 232
                              RESEARCH PROFESSIONALS
Research professionals are responsible for planning, directing and undertaking scientific,
quantitative and qualitative research through the application of theoretical principles and
practical techniques in order to address a research objective.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       2321 SCIENTIFIC RESEARCHERS
       2322 SOCIAL SCIENCE RESEARCHERS                                                                              1
       2329 RESEARCHERS NEC


2321 SCIENTIFIC RESEARCHERS                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                    2
Scientific researchers undertake the systematic study    Research associate (medical)
of the nature and behaviour of natural phenomena         Research scientist
based upon scientific observation, experiment and        Scientific officer
measurement.                                             Scientist

                                                                                                                    3
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                2322 SOCIAL SCIENCE
Entry is most common with a degree or equivalent
                                                              RESEARCHERS
qualification, but is possible with other academic
qualifications. Further training is typically provided
                                                         Social science researchers study the origin, structure
                                                         and characteristics of language, analyse the behaviour
                                                                                                                    4
through specialist short courses and the attainment
of professional qualifications.                          of human beings, organise the collection of
                                                         information for social surveys and independent
                                                         research, and undertake subsequent analysis.
TASKS
                                                                                                                    5
• plans, directs and undertakes research into natural    TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
   phenomena;                                            ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
• provides technical advisory and consulting             Entry is most common with a degree or equivalent
   services;                                             qualification but is possible with other academic
                                                         qualifications and/or relevant experience.
                                                                                                                    6
• designs tests and experiments to address research
   objective and find solutions;
• applies models and techniques to medical,
                                                         TASKS
   industrial, agricultural, military and similar
   applications;
                                                         • traces the evolution of word and language forms,         7
• analyses results and writes up results of tests and       compares grammatical structures and analyses the
   experiments undertaken;                                  relationships between ancient parent and modern
                                                            languages;
• presents results of scientific research to sponsors,
   addresses conferences and publishes articles          • compiles and analyses economic, demographic,
   outlining the methodology and results of research        legal, political, social and other data to address      8
   undertaken.                                              research objective;




                                                                                                                    9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   87
                • administers questionnaires, carries out                     • undertakes research on people, incidents and
Major Group 2



                     interviews, organises focus groups and                      other topics of interest for news, current affairs
                     implements other social research tools;                     programmes, documentaries and entertainment
                                                                                 broadcasts.
                • undertakes analysis of data, presents results of
                     research to sponsors, the media and other
                     interested organisations, addresses conferences
                     and publishes articles outlining the methodology         RELATED JOB TITLES
                     and results of research undertaken.
                                                                              Research assistant (university)
                                                                              Research associate (university)
                                                                              Researcher (broadcasting)
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            University research fellow
  1
                Anthropologist
                Archaeologist
                Geographer
                Historian
                Philologist
  2             Sociologist




                2329 RESEARCHERS NEC
  3             Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
                research activities not elsewhere classified in
                MINOR GROUP 232: Research Professionals.


  4             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Entry is most common with a degree or equivalent
                qualification but is possible with other academic
  5             qualifications and/or relevant experience.



                TASKS

  6             • design and develop an appropriate research
                     methodology in order to address the research
                     objective;

                • compiles and analyses quantitative and
                     qualitative data;
  7             • prepare reports and present results to summarise
                     main findings and conclusions;

                • advise government, private organisations and
                     special interest groups on policy issues;
  8             • writes journal articles, books, and addresses
                     conferences, seminars and the media to reveal
                     research findings;


  9

                88       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                     Major Group 2
               SUB-MAJOR GROUP 24
    BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE PROFESSIONALS
Business and public service professionals advise and act on behalf of clients in legal matters,
preside over judicial proceedings, collect and analyse financial information, perform
accounting duties, advise on business and management matters, and perform a variety of
other professional occupations within the public and voluntary sectors.


                                   MINOR GROUP 241
                                 LEGAL PROFESSIONALS                                                                  1
Legal professionals advise and act on behalf of individuals, businesses, organisations and
government in legal matters and preside over judicial proceedings.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
                                                                                                                      2
       2411 SOLICITORS AND LAWYERS, JUDGES AND CORONERS
       2419 LEGAL PROFESSIONALS NEC

                                                                                                                      3
2411 SOLICITORS AND LAWYERS,                            • advises client on the basis of legal knowledge,
     JUDGES AND CORONERS                                   research and past precedent as to whether to
                                                           proceed with legal action;
Workers in this unit group advise and act upon behalf
                                                        • drafts pleadings and questions in preparation for
of individuals, organisations, businesses and
                                                           court cases, appears in court to present evidence          4
government departments in legal matters, prepare
                                                           to the judge and jury, cross examine witnesses
and conduct court cases on behalf of clients, preside
                                                           and sum up why the court should decide in their
over judicial proceedings, and pronounce
                                                           clients favour;
judgements within a variety of court settings and
tribunals.                                              • undertakes legal business on behalf of client in
                                                           areas of business law, probate, conveyancing and           5
                                                           litigation and acts as trustee or executor if required;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                               • instructs counsel in higher and lower courts and
                                                           pleads cases in lower courts as appropriate;
Entry to training usually requires a qualifying law
degree or postgraduate diploma. Entrants then
                                                        • hears, reads and evaluates evidence, and instructs          6
                                                           or advises the jury on points of law or procedure;
undertake a further year of academic training and
then complete up to four years of assessed supervised   • conducts trials according to rules of procedure,
experience in legal practice. The position of judge        announces the verdict and passes sentence and/
is obtained by appointment of those who have               or awards costs and damages.
substantial post qualifying experience in legal                                                                       7
practice.
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES

TASKS                                                   Articled clerk
                                                        Barrister
• becomes acquainted with the facts of a case           Coroner                                                       8
   through reading statements, law reports, and         Judge
   consulting with clients or other professionals;      Solicitor


                                                                                                                      9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1     89
Major Group 2



                2419 LEGAL PROFESSIONALS NEC
                Workers in this unit group perform a variety of other
                professional legal occupations not elsewhere
                classified in MINOR GROUP 241: Legal
                Professionals.



                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Entry to training usually requires a qualifying law
  1             degree or postgraduate diploma. Entrants then
                undertake a further year of academic training and
                then complete up to four years of assessed supervised
                experience in legal practice. Entrants may also
                require up to five years post qualifying experience
                in legal practice.
  2
                TASKS

                • co-ordinates the activities of magistrates courts
  3                  and advises magistrates on law and legal
                     procedure;

                • provides legal advice to individuals within
                     Citizens Advice Bureaux, Law Centres and other
                     such establishments;
  4             • drafts and negotiates contracts on behalf of
                     employers;

                • advises employers, local and national
                     government and other organisations on aspects
  5                  of law and legislative implications of decisions
                     made;

                • represents public and private organisations in
                     court as necessary.

  6
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Clerk of the court
                Clerk to the justices
                Legal advisor
  7             Legal officer




  8


  9

                90       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                  Major Group 2
                         MINOR GROUP 242
              BUSINESS AND STATISTICAL PROFESSIONALS
Business and statistical professionals collect and analyse financial and other material,
perform accountancy duties and advise industrial, commercial and other establishments
on management and business matters.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       2421 CHARTERED AND CERTIFIED ACCOUNTANTS
       2422 MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTANTS                                                                                 1
       2423 MANAGEMENT CONSULTANTS, ACTUARIES, ECONOMISTS
            AND STATISTICIANS


2421 CHARTERED AND CERTIFIED                            RELATED JOB TITLES                                         2
     ACCOUNTANTS
                                                        Accountant (qualified)
Chartered and Certified Accountants provide             Auditor (qualified)
accounting and auditing services and advise clients     Certified accountant
on financial matters.                                   Chartered accountant
                                                        Company accountant
                                                                                                                   3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                               2422 MANAGEMENT
                                                             ACCOUNTANTS
Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent
                                                                                                                   4
qualification. To qualify as an accountant, entrants    Management accountants collect and analyse
must undertake a period of training within an           financial information and perform other accounting
approved organisation and successfully complete         duties required by management for the planning and
professional examinations. Exemptions to some           control of an establishment's income and
professional examinations are available to those with   expenditure.
                                                                                                                   5
appropriate academic qualifications.

                                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
TASKS                                                   ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• plans and oversees implementation of                  Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent            6
   accountancy system and policies;                     qualification. To qualify as an accountant, entrants
                                                        must gain practical experience with an employer and
• prepares financial documents and reports for          successfully complete professional examinations.
   management, shareholders, statutory or other         Exemptions to some professional examinations are
   bodies;                                              available to those with appropriate academic
                                                        qualifications.
                                                                                                                   7
• audits accounts and book-keeping records;
• prepares tax returns, advises on tax problems and
   contests disputed claim before tax official;         TASKS

• conducts financial investigations concerning          • evaluates financial information for management           8
   insolvency, fraud, possible mergers, etc.               purposes;




                                                                                                                   9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   91
                • liaises with management and other professionals             • advises governments, commercial enterprises,
Major Group 2



                     to compile budgets and other costs;                         organisations and other clients in light of research
                                                                                 findings;
                • prepares periodic accounts, budgetary reviews
                     and financial forecasts;                                 • addresses seminars, conferences and the media
                                                                                 to present results of research activity or to express
                • conducts investigations and advises management                 professional views.
                     on financial aspects of productivity, stock
                     holding, sales, new products, etc.
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES

                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            Actuary
  1             Cost accountant (qualified)
                                                                              Business analyst
                                                                              Economist
                Cost and management accountant (qualified)                    Management consultant
                Management accountant (qualified)                             Management services officer
                Works accountant (qualified)                                  Statistician

  2
                2423 MANAGEMENT
                     CONSULTANTS, ACTUARIES,
                     ECONOMISTS AND
                     STATISTICIANS
  3             Workers in this unit group advise industrial,
                commercial and other establishments on a variety of
                management, personnel, computing and technical
                matters, and apply theoretical principles and practical
                techniques to analyse and interpret data used to assist
  4             in the formulation of financial, business and
                economic policies.


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  5             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Entry is most common with a degree or equivalent
                qualification, but is possible with other academic
                qualifications. Professional qualifications are
                available and mandatory for actuarial occupations.
  6
                TASKS

                • assesses the functions, objectives and
                     requirements of the organisation seeking advice;
  7
                • identifies problems concerned with strategy,
                     policy, markets, organisation, computing
                     facilities, procedures and methods;

                • determines the appropriate method of data
  8                  collection and research methodology, and
                     analyses and interprets information gained and
                     formulates recommendations;


  9

                92       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 2
                        MINOR GROUP 243
              ARCHITECTS, TOWN PLANNERS, SURVEYORS
Architects, town planners and surveyors conduct surveys to determine the exact position
of natural and constructed features, prepare bills of quantities for construction projects,
and design and plan the layout of buildings for commercial, residential, industrial and
other uses.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       2431    ARCHITECTS
                                                                                                                     1
       2432    TOWN PLANNERS
       2433    QUANTITY SURVEYORS
       2434    CHARTERED SURVEYORS (NOT QUANTITY SURVEYORS)
                                                                                                                     2
2431 ARCHITECTS                                           RELATED JOB TITLES

Architects plan and design the construction and           Architect
development of buildings and land areas with regard       Architectural consultant
to functional and aesthetic requirements.                 Chartered architect                                        3
                                                          Landscape architect

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Entrants require a professional qualification in
                                                          2432 TOWN PLANNERS                                         4
architecture that will encompass an accredited degree     Town planners direct or undertake the planning of
and postgraduate qualification, and at least two years    the layout and the co-ordination of plans for the
practical experience.                                     development of urban and rural areas.

                                                                                                                     5
TASKS                                                     TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                          ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
• liaises with client and other professionals to
   establish building type, style, cost limitations and   Entrants usually possess either an accredited degree
   landscaping requirements;                              or postgraduate qualification and must have
                                                          completed at least two years work experience in town
                                                                                                                     6
• studies condition and characteristics of site,
   taking into account drainage, topsoil, trees, rock     planning before gaining professional status.
   formations, etc.;
• analyses site survey and advises client on
                                                          TASKS
   development and construction details and ensures
   that proposed design blends in with the
                                                                                                                     7
                                                          • analyses information to establish the nature,
   surrounding area;
                                                             extent, growth rate and likely development
• prepares detailed scale drawings and                       requirements of the area;
   specifications for design and construction and
                                                          • consults statutory bodies and other interested
   submits these for planning approval;
                                                             parties to ensure that local interests are catered      8
• monitors construction work in progress to ensure           for and to evaluate competing development
   compliance with specifications.                           proposals;



                                                                                                                     9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   93
                • drafts and presents graphic and narrative plans,            • examines tenders received, advises client on the
Major Group 2



                     affecting the use of public and private land,               most acceptable and assists with preparation of
                     housing and transport facilities;                           a contract document;

                • examines and evaluates development proposals                • measures and values work in progress and
                     submitted and recommends acceptance,                        examines any deviations from original contract;
                     modification or rejection;
                                                                              • measures and values completed contract for
                • liaises with national and local government and                 authorisation of payment.
                     other bodies to advise on urban and regional
                     planning issues.
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
  1             RELATED JOB TITLES                                            Quantity surveyor
                                                                              Quantity surveyor's assistant
                Planning officer (local government)                           Survey technician (quantity surveying)
                Town planner
                Town planning consultant
  2
                                                                              2434 CHARTERED SURVEYORS
                2433 QUANTITY SURVEYORS                                            (NOT QUANTITY
                Quantity surveyors advise on financial and                         SURVEYORS)
                contractual matters relating to, and prepare bills of
  3             quantities for, construction projects and provide
                                                                              Chartered surveyors conduct surveys related to the
                                                                              measurement, management, valuation and
                other support functions concerning the financing and
                                                                              development of land, natural resources, buildings,
                materials required for building projects.
                                                                              other types of property, and infrastructure such as
                                                                              harbours, roads and railway lines.

  4             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                Entry is through professional training and                    ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                membership of professional organisations. Entry to
                professional examinations will require GCSEs/S                Entry requirements to professional bodies vary.
  5             grades and A levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award,               Entrants usually possess an accredited degree,
                a degree or equivalent qualification. Candidates              equivalent qualification and/or postgraduate
                usually undertake a period of probationary training           qualification. Entrants must also have successfully
                and professional assessment.                                  completed a probationary training period and
                                                                              professional assessment.
  6
                TASKS
                                                                              TASKS
                • liaises with client on project costs, formulates
                     detailed cost plan and advises contractors and           • surveys, measures and describes land surfaces
                     engineers to ensure that they remain within cost            to establish property boundaries and to aid with
  7                  limit;                                                      construction or cartographic work;
                • examines plans and specifications and prepares              • surveys mines, prepares drawings of surfaces,
                     details of the material and labour required for             hazards and other features to control the extent
                     the project;                                                and direction of mining;
  8             • prepares bills of quantities for use by contractors         • surveys buildings to determine necessary
                     when tendering for work;                                    alterations and repairs;




  9

                94       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• measures shore lines, elevations and underwater




                                                                                                               Major Group 2
   contours, establishes high and low water marks,
   plots shore features and defines navigable
   channels.



RELATED JOB TITLES

Building surveyor
Chartered surveyor
Land surveyor
Mining surveyor
Surveyor                                                                                                        1
Surveyor and estimator




                                                                                                                2


                                                                                                                3


                                                                                                                4


                                                                                                                5


                                                                                                                6


                                                                                                                7


                                                                                                                8


                                                                                                                9

                                                     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   95
Major Group 2



                                                  MINOR GROUP 244
                                           PUBLIC SERVICE PROFESSIONALS
                Workers in this minor group advise on the formulation and implementation of government
                policy, direct the activities of government departments; provide information, advice and
                support to protect the welfare of vulnerable groups; supervise, counsel and help offenders;
                and provide spiritual motivation and guidance.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                        2441    PUBLIC SERVICE ADMINISTRATIVE PROFESSIONALS
  1
                        2442    SOCIAL WORKERS
                        2443    PROBATION OFFICERS
                        2444    CLERGY
  2
                2441 PUBLIC SERVICE                                           • co-ordinates and directs the activities of Inland
                     ADMINISTRATIVE                                              Revenue offices, Job Centres, Benefits Agency
                                                                                 offices and other local offices of national
                     PROFESSIONALS                                               government;
  3             Public service administrative professionals advise on         • develops and implements administrative polices
                the implementation and formulation of government                 of government departments, including pay
                policy, develops and implements the administrative               arrangements, personnel and training policies and
                policies of government departments, and co-                      capital projects;
                ordinates and directs the resources and activities of
  4             offices of local and national government departments.         • registers and maintains records of all births,
                                                                                 deaths and marriages in local authority area,
                                                                                 issues appropriate certificates and reports any
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                         suspicious causes of death to the coroner.
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  5             Entrants typically possess a degree or an equivalent          RELATED JOB TITLES
                qualification. Entry is also possible by internal
                promotion for those with appropriate experience.              Area officer (local government)
                Training is typically provided on-the-job in the form         Civil servant (grade 6,7)
                of short courses for specialist areas.                        Divisional officer (local government)
  6                                                                           Principal/Grade 7 (government)
                                                                              Registrar of births, deaths and marriages
                TASKS                                                         Superintendent registrar

                • advises government on the interpretation and
                     implementation of policy decisions, acts and
  7                  regulations, and provides technical assistance in        2442 SOCIAL WORKERS
                     the formulation of government policy;
                                                                              Social workers provide information, advice and
                • co-ordinates the activities of departmental staff,          support to protect the welfare of vulnerable groups
                     assigns tasks and responsibilities and makes             including children, young people, families under
                     changes in procedures to deal with variations in
  8                  workload;
                                                                              stress, people with disabilities, elderly people and
                                                                              people who are mentally or physically ill.




  9

                96       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 2
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                  TASKS
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                          • produces pre-sentence reports to the court about
Both graduate and non-graduate entry is possible.            an individual's crime, their personal
Entrants are required to take the Diploma of Social          circumstances, the suitability of sentencing, the
Work professional qualification. Exemptions may              likelihood of re-offending and the future risk to
be possible for those with relevant qualifications and/      the public;
or experience.
                                                          • enforces court orders and serves the public by
                                                             providing a wide range of supervision
                                                             programmes for those in receipt of a community
TASKS                                                        sentence;

• liaises with other health and social care               • draw up probation plans with offenders and help          1
   professionals to identify those in need and at risk       them follow it, advise them on any work and help
   within the local community;                               them with any family or social problems;

• interviews individuals and groups to assesses the       • works with prisoners in giving advice on
   nature and extent of difficulties;                        problems such as drug and alcohol abuse,
                                                             addressing training needs, finding work and             2
• arranges for further counselling or assistance in          getting accommodation.
   the form of financial or material help;

• attempts to resolve family problems and, if
   necessary, arranges for children to be resettled       RELATED JOB TITLES
   with foster parents or in a children's home;
                                                          Community service officer
                                                                                                                     3
• keeps case records and prepares reports.                Probation officer



RELATED JOB TITLES                                        2444 CLERGY                                                4
Child care officer                                        Members of the clergy provide spiritual motivation
Child protection officer                                  and guidance, conduct worship according to the form
Social worker                                             of service of a particular faith/denomination and
Team leader (social work)                                 perform related functions associated with religious
                                                          beliefs and practices.                                     5
2443 PROBATION OFFICERS                                   TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                          ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Probation officers supervise, counsel and help
offenders before trial, during any prison or              Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades, A levels/       6
community sentence and on their release from prison.      H grades, a degree or equivalent qualification.
                                                          Candidates must pass a residential selection procedure.
                                                          Entrants then attend theological college where training
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                  includes theological instruction and practical pastoral
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                 experience. Training can last up to six years depending    7
                                                          upon age, experience and denomination.
Candidates are recruited with a variety of academic
qualifications or with relevant experience. In
England and Wales off- and on-the-job training is         TASKS
provided leading to NVQ in Community Care at
Level 4. In Scotland, entry requirements are the same     • prepares and delivers sermons and talks and leads        8
as for social workers.                                       congregation in worship;




                                                                                                                     9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   97
                • interprets doctrines and instructs intending clergy
Major Group 2



                     members in religious principles and practices;

                • performs marriages, funerals, christenings and
                     other special religious services;

                • visits members of the congregation in their homes
                     and in hospitals and counsels those in need of
                     spiritual or moral guidance;

                • undertakes administration and social duties as
                     required.

  1
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Clergyman/woman
                Clerk in holy orders
                Deacon
  2             Minister (religion)
                Priest
                Vicar


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                98       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                 Major Group 2
                            MINOR GROUP 245
                 LIBRARIANS AND RELATED PROFESSIONALS
Librarians and related professionals appraise, obtain, organise, develop and make available
collections of written and recorded material, art objects, pictures, artefacts and other items
of general and specialised interest.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       2451 LIBRARIANS
       2452 ARCHIVISTS AND CURATORS                                                                               1

2451 LIBRARIANS                                        RELATED JOB TITLES

Librarians appraise, obtain, index, collate and make
available library acquisitions and organise and
                                                       Assistant librarian
                                                       Branch librarian
                                                                                                                  2
control other library services.                        Chartered librarian
                                                       Librarian

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                              2452 ARCHIVISTS AND CURATORS                               3
Entry will require an accredited degree or             Archivists and curators collect, appraise and preserve
postgraduate qualification. Most postgraduate          collections of recorded and other material of
courses require applicants to have had up to twelve    historical interest.
months work experience. Professional qualifications                                                               4
and NVQs/SVQs in Information and Library Service
are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.                    TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                       ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                                                       There are no formal academic requirements although
TASKS
                                                       entrants usually possess a degree or higher degree.        5
• selects and arranges for the acquisition of books,   Many postgraduate courses require applicants to
   periodicals, audio-visual and other material;       have gained relevant practical experience prior to
                                                       entry. Training is typically received on-the-job.
• collects, classifies and catalogues information,     Professional qualifications leading to NVQs/SVQs
   books and other material;                           in Curatorial and Conservation Skills at Levels 3, 4
                                                       and 5 are available.
                                                                                                                  6
• prepares and circulates abstracts, bibliographies,
   book lists, etc.;

• identifies the information needs of clients, seeks   TASKS
   out and evaluates information sources;
                                                       • examines, appraises and advises on acquisition           7
• establishes information storage systems to deal         of exhibits, government papers and other
   with queries and to maintain up to date records;       material;
• manages library borrowing and inter-library loan     • classifies material and arranges for its safe
   facilities.                                            keeping and preservation;
                                                                                                                  8


                                                                                                                  9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   99
                • maintains indexes, bibliographies and descriptive
Major Group 2



                   details of archive material and arranges for
                   reproductions of items where necessary;

                • liaises with school and other groups or
                   individuals, publicises exhibits and arranges
                   special displays for general, specialised or
                   educational interest;

                • allows access to original material or material not
                   on display for researchers;

                • answers verbal or written enquiries and gives
  1                advice on exhibits or other material.



                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Archivist
  2             Conservator
                Curator




  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                100      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                              Major Group 3
                    MAJOR GROUP 3
        ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL
                     OCCUPATIONS
This major group covers occupations whose main tasks require experience and knowledge
of principles and practices necessary to assume operational responsibility and to give
technical support to Professionals in the natural sciences, engineering, life sciences, social
sciences, humanities and related fields and to Managers and Senior Officials.


The main tasks involve the operation and maintenance of complex equipment; legal, financial                    1
and design services; the provision of information technology services; providing skilled support
to health and social care professionals; and serving in protective service occupations. Culture,
media and sports occupations are also included in this major group. Most occupations in this
major group will have an associated high-level vocational qualification, often involving a
substantial period of full-time training or further study. Some additional task-related training is            2
usually provided through a formal period of induction.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:
                                                                                                               3
31 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
    311    SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS
    312    DRAUGHTSPERSONS AND BUILDING INSPECTORS                                                             4
    313    IT SERVICE DELIVERY OCCUPATIONS

32 HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE ASSOCIATE
   PROFESSIONALS
                                                                                                               5
    321    HEALTH ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
    322    THERAPISTS
    323    SOCIAL WELFARE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
                                                                                                               6
33 PROTECTIVE SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
    331    PROTECTIVE SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

34 CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORTS OCCUPATIONS                                                                       7
    341    ARTISTIC AND LITERARY OCCUPATIONS
    342    DESIGN ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
    343    MEDIA ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
    344    SPORTS AND FITNESS OCCUPATIONS                                                                      8


                                                                                                               9

                                                   Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   101
Major Group 3



                35 BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATE
                   PROFESSIONALS
                      351   TRANSPORT ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
                      352   LEGAL ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
                      353   BUSINESS AND FINANCE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
                      354   SALES AND RELATED ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
                      355   CONSERVATION ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
                      356   PUBLIC SERVICE AND OTHER ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
  1


  2


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                102     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 3
                      SUB-MAJOR GROUP 31
              SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATE
                        PROFESSIONALS
Science and technology associate professionals perform a variety of technical support
functions to scientists, technologists, engineers and architects, prepare technical drawings,
undertake building inspections, provide technical support for IT operations and users.


                          MINOR GROUP 311
                SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS                                                                  1
Workers in this minor group perform a variety of technical support functions to assist the
work of scientists and technologists, assist in the design, development and maintenance of
electronic systems, perform technical quality assurance related tasks, support the work of
building and civil engineers, and perform various other technical support functions for                              2
engineers.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       3111    LABORATORY TECHNICIANS                                                                                3
       3112    ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONICS TECHNICIANS
       3113    ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS
       3114    BUILDING AND CIVIL ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS
       3115    QUALITY ASSURANCE TECHNICIANS                                                                         4
       3119    SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS NEC


3111 LABORATORY TECHNICIANS                              TASKS                                                       5
Laboratory technicians carry out routine laboratory      • sets up and assists with the construction and the
tests and perform a variety of technical support              development of scientific apparatus for
functions requiring the application of established or         experimental, demonstration or other purposes;
prescribed procedures and techniques to assist
scientists with their research, development, analysis    • prepares and analyses body fluids, secretions             6
and testing.                                                  and/or tissue to detect infections or to examine
                                                              the effects of different drugs;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 • grows cultures of bacteria and viruses, prepares
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     tissue sections and other organic and inorganic        7
                                                              material for examination and stains and fixes
Entry varies from employer to employer. Entrants              slides for microscope work;
usually possess GCSEs/S grades, an appropriate
BTEC/SQA award or a GNVQ/GSVQ. Professional              • operates and services specialised scientific
qualifications and Modern Apprenticeships are                 equipment, undertakes prescribed measurements
available in some areas of work. Good eyesight, and           and analyses and ensures that sterile conditions       8
in some cases, normal colour vision are also required.        necessary for some equipment are maintained;




                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   103
                • records and collates data obtained from
Major Group 3


                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                   experimental work and documents all work
                   carried out.                                               Electrical technician
                                                                              Electronics technician
                                                                              Signals officer (MOD)
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Cytology screener                                             3113 ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS
                Health physics monitor
                Laboratory technician                                         Engineering technicians perform a variety of
                Scientific assistant                                          technical support functions to assist engineers with
                                                                              the design, development, operation, installation and
  1                                                                           maintenance of engineering systems and
                                                                              constructions.
                3112 ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONICS
                     TECHNICIANS
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                Electrical and electronics technicians perform a
  2             variety of miscellaneous technical support functions
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                to assist with the design, development, installation,         Entrants to training usually posses GCSEs/S grades.
                operation and maintenance of electrical and                   Professional training consists either of full-time study
                electronic systems.                                           for a BTEC/SQA award followed by two years on-
                                                                              the-job training, or a Modern Apprenticeship leading
  3                                                                           to an NVQ/SVQ at Level 3 or 4.
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              TASKS
                Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, an
                Intermediate GNVQ/GSVQ Level II or a BTEC/                    • plans and prepares work and test schedules based
  4             SQA award. NVQs/SVQs in Servicing Electronic                     on specifications and drawings;
                Systems are available at Levels 2 and 3.
                                                                              • sets up equipment, undertakes tests, takes
                                                                                 readings, performs calculations and records and
                                                                                 interprets data;
                TASKS
  5                                                                           • prepares estimates of materials, equipment and
                • plans and prepares work and test schedules based               labour required for engineering projects;
                   on specifications and drawings;
                                                                              • diagnoses and detects faults and implements
                • sets up equipment, undertakes tests, takes                     procedures to maintain efficient operation of
                   readings, performs calculations and records and               systems and equipment;
  6                interprets data;
                                                                              • visits and advises clients on the use and servicing
                • plans installation methods, checks completed                   of mechanical and chemical engineering products
                   installation for safety and controls or undertakes            and services.
                   the initial running of the new electrical or
                   electronic equipment or system;
  7
                • diagnoses and detects faults and implements                 RELATED JOB TITLES
                   procedures to maintain efficient operation of
                   systems and equipment;                                     Commissioning engineer
                                                                              Contracts engineer
                • visits and advises clients on the use and servicing         Engineering technician
  8                of electrical and electronic systems and                   Engineer's assistant
                   equipment.                                                 Technician engineer




  9

                104      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                  Major Group 3
3114 BUILDING AND CIVIL                                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
     ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS                           ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Building and civil engineering technicians perform     Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades, a BTEC/
a variety of miscellaneous technical support           SQA award or A levels/H grades. Training is
functions to assist civil and building engineers.      typically received on-the-job, supplemented by
                                                       training courses where instruction in specific
                                                       techniques is required. Various industry specific
                                                       NVQs/SVQs encompass aspects of quality control.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Entrants usually possess a relevant BTEC/SQA           TASKS
award or an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III. The
                                                       • sets up scientific, electronic, or other technical
                                                                                                                   1
status of engineering technician is obtained after a        equipment to perform functional and inspection
period of further training at work and upon gaining         tests;
the membership of a professional engineering
institution.                                           • analyses and interprets the results of tests
                                                            undertaken and writes up reports upon completion;      2
                                                       • supervises the work of routine inspection staff
TASKS                                                       and notes any defects reported;

• sets up apparatus and equipment and undertakes       • assists quality control engineers in undertaking
                                                            production audits;
   field and laboratory tests of soil and work
   materials;
                                                                                                                   3
                                                       • liaises with production engineers and staff to
• performs calculations and collects, records and           maintain the quality of output and to develop
   interprets data;                                         management quality systems.

• sets out construction site, supervises excavations
   and marks out position of building work to be       RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                   4
   undertaken;
                                                       NDT technician
• inspects construction materials and supervises       QA co-ordinator
   work of contractors to ensure compliance with       Quality assurance technician
   specifications and arranges remedial work as                                                                    5
   necessary.
                                                       3119 SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
                                                            TECHNICIANS NEC
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                       Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
Building technician                                    technical support functions not elsewhere classified
                                                                                                                   6
Civil engineering technician                           in MINOR GROUP 311: Science and Engineering
Structural engineering technician                      Technicians.


                                                       TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                    7
3115 QUALITY ASSURANCE                                 ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
     TECHNICIANS
                                                       Entry varies from employer to employer. Entrants
Quality assurance technicians perform a variety of     usually possess GCSEs/S grades, a BTEC/SQA
technical inspections, testing and monitoring tasks    award or an Intermediate GNVQ/GSVQ Level II.
to detect processing, manufacturing and other          Professional qualifications are available and may be        8
defects.                                               required in some areas of work.




                                                                                                                   9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   105
Major Group 3


                TASKS

                • sets up apparatus for experimental,
                   demonstration or other purposes;

                • undertakes tests and takes measurements and
                   readings;

                • performs calculations and records and interprets
                   data;

                • otherwise assists technologists as directed.

  1
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Materials technician
                Technical assistant
                Technical officer
  2             Technician




  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                106        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 3
                     MINOR GROUP 312
          DRAUGHTSPERSONS AND BUILDING INSPECTORS
Workers in this minor group prepare technical drawings, plans and charts, give technical
assistance to planners and architects, and undertake inspections of buildings to ensure
compliance with regulations, bye-laws and other requirements.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       3121 ARCHITECTURAL TECHNOLOGISTS AND TOWN PLANNING
            TECHNICIANS
                                                                                                                     1
       3122 DRAUGHTSPERSONS
       3123 BUILDING INSPECTORS


3121 ARCHITECTURAL                                       • issues development permits as authorised;                 2
     TECHNOLOGISTS AND TOWN                              • checks that completed work conforms to
     PLANNING TECHNICIANS                                     specifications.
Architectural technologists and town planning
technicians perform a variety of technical support
                                                         RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                     3
functions to assist architects and planners with the
design of buildings and the layout of urban and rural
areas.                                                   Architectural assistant
                                                         Architectural technician
                                                         Architectural technologist
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 Planning assistant (local government)                       4
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                Planning enforcement officer

Entrants possess a variety of qualifications including
GCSEs/S grades, a BTEC/SQA award, an Advanced
GNVQ/GSVQ Level III or a degree. Professional            3122 DRAUGHTSPERSONS                                        5
qualifications are available and membership to
                                                         Draughtspersons prepare technical drawings, plans,
professional institutions may be required for some
                                                         maps, charts and similar items.
posts.



TASKS
                                                         TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                    6
                                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
• investigates proposed design with regard to
                                                         Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, BTEC/
   practicality, cost and use;
                                                         SQA awards, an appropriate GNVQ/GSVQ or A
• prepares building plans, drawings and                  levels/H grades. Further training consists of courses
                                                                                                                     7
   specifications for use by contractors;                of study and supervised practical experience.
• liaises with engineers and building contractors
   regarding technical construction problems and
   attends site meetings on behalf of architect;         TASKS

• surveys land and property uses and prepares            • examines design specification to determine                8
   report for planning authority;                             general requirements;




                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   107
                • considers the suitability of different materials            • visits building sites, examines foundations and
Major Group 3



                   with regard to the dimensions and weight and                  inspects drains to ensure compliance with
                   calculates the likely fatigue, stresses, tolerances,          regulations;
                   bonds and threads;
                                                                              • inspects structural condition of buildings for
                • prepares design drawings, plans or sketches and                insurance and mortgage purposes;
                   checks feasibility of construction and compliance
                   with safety regulations;                                   • prepares reports and recommendations on all
                                                                                 inspections made.
                • prepares detailed drawings, plans, charts or maps
                   that include natural features, desired surface
                   finish, elevations, electrical circuitry and other         RELATED JOB TITLES
                   details as required;
  1                                                                           Building control officer
                • arranges for completed drawings to be
                   reproduced for use as working drawings.                    Building inspector
                                                                              Inspector (NHBRC)


                RELATED JOB TITLES
  2
                Cartographer
                Designer-detailer
                Designer-draughtsman
                Draughtsman/woman
  3             Draughtsman-engineer
                Engineering draughtsman



                3123 BUILDING INSPECTORS
  4             Building inspectors inspect building plans and
                structures to ensure compliance with building
                regulations, bye-laws and any other statutory
                requirements.

  5
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Entry is possible with a variety of academic
                qualifications although employers increasingly
  6             require candidates to possess a degree. Professional
                qualifications and membership to professional
                bodies are available and may be required in some
                posts.

  7
                TASKS

                • examines building plans to ensure compliance
                   with local, statutory and other requirements;
  8             • inspects building structure, sanitation, lighting,
                   ventilation and fire precautions to determine
                   suitability for habitation;



  9

                108      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 3
                              MINOR GROUP 313
                     IT SERVICE DELIVERY OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group are responsible for the day-to-day running of computer systems
and networks, and provide technical support, advice and guidance for IT users and customers.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       3131 IT OPERATIONS TECHNICIANS
       3132 IT USER SUPPORT TECHNICIANS
                                                                                                                     1
3131 IT OPERATIONS                                       • acts as a liaison between users, outside suppliers,
     TECHNICIANS                                              engineers and other technical groups;

IT operations technicians are responsible for the day-
                                                         • develops and maintains site administration
to-day running of computer systems and networks
                                                              documentation and configuration records.               2
including the preparation of back-up systems, and
for performing regular checks to ensure the smooth
functioning of such systems.                             RELATED JOB TITLES

                                                         Computer operator
                                                         Database manager
                                                                                                                     3
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 IT technician
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                Network technician
                                                         Systems administrator
Entry is possible with a variety of academic             Web master
qualifications and/or relevant experience. Entrants
typically possess GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H
                                                                                                                     4
grades, BTEC/SQA awards, an Advanced GNVQ/
GSVQ Level III or a degree. Training is usually          3132 IT USER SUPPORT
provided on-the-job supplemented by specialised               TECHNICIANS
courses.      Postgraduate and professional
qualifications, and a variety of NVQs/SVQs at            IT user support technicians are responsible for             5
Levels 2, 3 and 4 are available.                         providing technical support, advice and guidance for
                                                         customers or IT users within an organisation, either
                                                         directly or by telephone, e-mail or other network
TASKS                                                    interaction.
                                                                                                                     6
• installs, monitors and supports area networks and
   accompanying hardware and software;                   TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
• analyses      performance        and       makes
   recommendations to enhance reliability, usability,    Entry is possible with a variety of academic
   security and other aspects of system                  qualifications and/or relevant experience. Entrants         7
   performance;                                          typically possess GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H
• provides guidance to users on hardware, software       grades, BTEC/SQA awards, an Advanced GNVQ/
   and network operations;                               GSVQ Level III or a degree. Training is usually
                                                         provided on-the-job supplemented by specialised
• identifies problems, agrees remedial action and        courses. Postgraduate and professional qualifications,
                                                         and NVQs/SVQs in Support Users of Information
                                                                                                                     8
   undertakes emergency network maintenance if
   required;                                             Technology at Levels 2 and 3 are available.



                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   109
Major Group 3


                TASKS

                • addresses IT queries and problems from
                   customers or IT users within an organisation;

                • discusses problem with IT user and asks
                   questions in order to determine the likely cause;

                • advises users remotely on the sequence of actions
                   that are likely to remedy the problem;

                • arranges for support staff or field engineers to
                   visit the user, or arrange for the return of
  1                equipment for inspection where problems cannot
                   be solved remotely;

                • maintains records of the queries received, the
                   action taken to remedy the problem and the final
                   outcome.
  2
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Help desk operator
                Helpline operator (computing)
  3             IT helpline support officer
                Support technician (computing)
                Systems support officer


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                110      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                      Major Group 3
                  SUB-MAJOR GROUP 32
          HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE ASSOCIATE
                     PROFESSIONALS
Health and social welfare associate professionals provide a variety of technical support
functions for health professionals in the treatment of patients, apply physical, therapeutic
and other treatments or activities to assist in physical and psychological recovery, and
provide social welfare and related community services.


                             MINOR GROUP 321                                                                           1
                     HEALTH ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
Workers in this minor group assist doctors in their tasks, provide nursing care for the sick
and injured, provide prenatal and postnatal care for mothers and babies, administer first
aid treatment in emergencies, operate x-ray and other imaging equipment, fit hearing aids                              2
and spectacles, treat foot, eye, speech and movement disorders, provide a variety of technical
support functions for health professionals.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
                                                                                                                       3
       3211    NURSES
       3212    MIDWIVES
       3213    PARAMEDICS
       3214    MEDICAL RADIOGRAPHERS                                                                                   4
       3215    CHIROPODISTS
       3216    DISPENSING OPTICIANS
       3217    PHARMACEUTICAL DISPENSERS
       3218    MEDICAL AND DENTAL TECHNICIANS                                                                          5

3211 NURSES                                              registration training is available for a range of clinical
                                                         specialisms.
Nurses provide general and/or specialised nursing                                                                      6
care for the sick, injured and others in need of such
care, assist medical doctors with their tasks, and
advise and teach on nursing practice.                    TASKS

                                                         • assists medical doctors, deals with emergencies
                                                              and prepares patients for examination;
                                                                                                                       7
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                • monitors patient's progress, administers drugs
                                                              and medicines, applies surgical dressings and
Both non-graduate, graduate and postgraduate entry            gives other forms of treatment;
is possible. Training lasts up to four years depending
upon the method of study. There is a lower age limit     • participates in the preparation for physical and
                                                                                                                       8
of 16 years 6 months to enter training. Post-                 psychological treatment of mentally ill patients;



                                                                                                                       9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   111
                • plans duty rotas and organises and directs the
Major Group 3


                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                   work and training of ward and theatre nursing
                   staff;                                                     Midwife
                                                                              Midwifery sister
                • advises on nursing care, disease prevention,
                   nutrition, etc. and liaises with hospital board/
                   management on issues concerning nursing policy.
                                                                              3213 PARAMEDICS
                                                                              Paramedics provide advanced first aid and life
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            support treatment in emergency situations and
                                                                              transport sick and injured people who require skilled
                Health visitor                                                treatment.
  1             Nurse
                Staff nurse
                State enrolled nurse
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                State registered nurse
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                Ward sister
                                                                              Paramedics must have completed at least 12 months
  2                                                                           experience as an ambulance technician (see Unit
                3212 MIDWIVES                                                 Group 6112: Ambulance staff (excluding
                                                                              paramedics)) before selection for paramedic training.
                Midwives deliver, or assist in the delivery of babies,        Selection involves written and practical
                provide antenatal and postnatal care and advise               examinations in ambulance care and an interview.
  3             parents on baby care.                                         Entrants must then complete 8 weeks of assessed
                                                                              training to gain a Certificate for Ambulance
                                                                              Paramedic Skills.
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  4             Entry is most common as a Registered General Nurse
                                                                              TASKS

                (RGN) to shortened pre-registration training lasting          • drives ambulance or accompanies driver to
                18 months. For non-registered nurses, entry to the               respond to calls for assistance at accidents,
                three year pre-registration training programme                   emergencies and other incidents;
                requires GCSEs/S grades or an approved educational
  5             equivalent. Some institutions allow candidates who            • ascertains nature of injuries, provides first aid
                do not possess the minimum entry requirements to                 treatment and assesses appropriate method of
                take an educational test. There is a lower age limit             conveying patients;
                of 17 years to enter training.
                                                                              • completes patient report forms describing
                                                                                 patients condition and any treatment undertaken
  6             TASKS
                                                                                 for the use of medical staff;

                                                                              • transports and accompanies patients who either
                • monitors condition and progress of patient during              require or potentially require skilled treatment
                   pregnancy;                                                    whilst travelling.
                • delivers babies in normal births and assists
  7                doctors with difficult deliveries;
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                • monitors recovery of mother in postnatal period
                   and supervises the nursing of premature and other          Ambulance paramedic
                   babies requiring special attention;                        Paramedic
  8             • advises on baby care, exercise, diet and family
                   planning issues.




  9

                112      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 3
3214 MEDICAL RADIOGRAPHERS                               podiatric medicine. Courses combine theoretical and
                                                         practical training. There is a lower age limit for entry
Medical radiographers operate x-ray machines,            of 18 years.
ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging and other
imaging devices for diagnostic and therapeutic
purposes under the direction of a radiologist or other
                                                         TASKS
medical practitioner.
                                                         • examines patient's feet to determine the nature
                                                              and extent of disorder;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                • treats conditions of the skin, nails and soft tissues
                                                              of feet by minor surgery, massage and heat
Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades and A                 treatment, padding and strapping or drugs;             1
levels/H grades followed by three years training for
a recognised degree in radiography. Minimum age
                                                         • prescribes, makes and fits pads and other
                                                              appliances to correct and/or protect foot
on entry to training is 17 years. Post-qualifying
                                                              disorders;
courses are available for specialist areas.
                                                         • advises patient on aspects of foot care to avoid
                                                              recurrence of foot problems;
                                                                                                                     2
TASKS
                                                         • refers patients who require further medical or
• verifies identity of patient and ensures that               surgical attention.
   necessary preparations have been made for the
   examination/treatment;                                                                                            3
                                                         RELATED JOB TITLES
• decides length and intensity of exposure or
   strength of dosage of isotope;                        Chiropodist
                                                         Chiropodist-podiatrist
• positions patient and operates x-ray, scanning or
   fluoroscopic equipment;                                                                                           4
• maintains records of all radiographic/therapeutic      3216 DISPENSING OPTICIANS
   work undertaken.
                                                         Dispensing opticians supply and fit spectacles and
                                                         other optical aids according to prescription.
RELATED JOB TITLES                                                                                                   5
Diagnostic radiographer (medical services)               TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
Medical radiographer                                     ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
X-ray operator
                                                         Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades, a
                                                         BTEC/SQA award, an Intermediate GNVQ/GSVQ
                                                                                                                     6
                                                         Level II or A levels/H grades followed by up to three
3215 CHIROPODISTS                                        years training and the successful completion of
                                                         professional examinations.
Chiropodists diagnose and treat ailments and
abnormalities of the human foot.
                                                                                                                     7
                                                         TASKS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 • interprets prescription and measures patient's
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     face to determine distance between pupil centres,
                                                              height of bridge of nose, etc.;
Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades and A                                                                       8
levels/H grades followed by three years training for     • advises patient on lens type and choice of
a recognised degree in chiropody, podiatry or                 spectacle frames;



                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   113
                • prepares detailed instructions for workshop;
Major Group 3



                                                                              3218 MEDICAL AND DENTAL
                • ensures that completed spectacles conform to                     TECHNICIANS
                   specification and fit the patient correctly and            Workers in this unit group operate cardiographic and
                   comfortably;                                               encephalographic testing equipment, give simple
                • fits spectacles and advises patient on lens care and        dental treatment, fit artificial limbs and hearing aids,
                   any other difficulties likely to be experienced.           and undertake related medical and dental tasks.



                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                Dispensing optician
  1                                                                           Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, BTEC/
                                                                              SQA awards, an Intermediate GNVQ/GSVQ Level
                                                                              II or A levels/H grades. Training may last up to five
                3217 PHARMACEUTICAL                                           years depending upon the field and method of study.
                     DISPENSERS                                               Professional qualifications and NVQs/SVQs at Level
                                                                              3 are available in some areas.
  2             Pharmaceutical dispensers assist pharmacists in
                dispensing drugs and medicines, and issue pre-
                packaged prescriptions.
                                                                              TASKS

                                                                              • operates equipment to diagnose and record or
  3             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                         treat hearing, heart, brain, lung and kidney
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                        ailments;
                Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades. Training             • undertakes scaling and polishing of teeth, applies
                is typically received on-the-job, supplemented by                medicaments, carries out post-operative hygiene
                study towards vocational qualifications. NVQs/                   work and advises on preventative dentistry;
  4             SVQs in Pharmacy Services are available at Level 3.
                                                                              • makes dentures, crowns, bridges, orthodontic and
                                                                                 other dental appliances according to individual
                TASKS                                                            patient requirements;

                                                                              • measures patient's for, and fits them with, surgical
                • checks received prescriptions for legality and
  5                accuracy;
                                                                                 appliances, hearing aids and artificial limbs;

                                                                              • performs related medical tasks including treating
                • prepares drugs and medicines under the                         hair and scalp disorders and conducting tests on
                   supervision of pharmacist;
                                                                                 glaucoma patients.
                • maintains records of prescriptions received and
  6                drugs issued;
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                • advises patients or customers on the use of drugs
                   prescribed or medication purchased;                        Audiologist
                • checks stock levels, orders new stock from                  Cardiographer
  7                pharmaceutical companies and ensures that drugs            Dental hygienist
                                                                              Dental technician
                   are stored appropriately.
                                                                              Medical technical officer

                RELATED JOB TITLES
  8             Dispenser
                Dispensing assistant
                Pharmacy technician


  9

                114      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 3
                                      MINOR GROUP 322
                                        THERAPISTS
Workers in this minor group plan and apply physical, therapeutic and other treatments or
activities to assist in the physical and psychological recovery from illness and injury, and
to minimise the effects of disabilities.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       3221   PHYSIOTHERAPISTS
       3222   OCCUPATIONAL THERAPISTS                                                                               1
       3223   SPEECH AND LANGUAGE THERAPISTS
       3229   THERAPISTS NEC


                                                                                                                    2
3221 PHYSIOTHERAPISTS                                   RELATED JOB TITLES

Physiotherapists plan and apply massage, exercise,      Chartered physiotherapist
hydrotherapy and electrotherapy in the treatment of     Physiotherapist
injuries, diseases or disabilities.                     Superintendent physiotherapist
                                                                                                                    3
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                        3222 OCCUPATIONAL
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                    THERAPISTS

Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades and A
                                                        Occupational therapists work with people who have
                                                        a physical or mental disability or mental illness in
                                                                                                                    4
levels/H grades followed by up to four years training
                                                        order to maximise self-confidence and independent
on an approved degree scheme necessary for state
                                                        functioning.
registration as a physiotherapist. To enter training
there is a lower age limit of 17 years and candidates
must pass a medical examination.
                                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                    5
                                                        ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TASKS                                                   Entrants usually possess A levels/H grades, an
                                                        Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, a BTEC/SQA
• examines medical reports and assesses patient         award or equivalent qualifications followed by              6
   to determine the condition of muscles, nerves or     training on an approved degree scheme necessary
   joints in need of treatment;                         for state registration as an occupational therapist.
                                                        There is a lower age limit of 18 years to enter
• plans and undertakes therapy to improve               training.
   circulation, restore joint mobility, strengthen
   muscles and reduce pain;                                                                                         7
• explains treatment to and instructs patient in        TASKS
   posture and other exercises and adapts treatment     • considers the physical, psychological and social
   as necessary;                                             needs of a patient;
• monitors patient's progress and liaises with others   • designs, initiates and monitors carefully selected        8
   concerned with the treatment and rehabilitation           and graded activities as part of the assessment
   of patient.                                               and intervention process;



                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   115
                • makes home visits to clients, families and carers
Major Group 3


                                                                               RELATED JOB TITLES
                    to assist them to deal and cope with disability;
                                                                               Speech and language therapist
                • counsels clients in ways to promote a healthy                Speech therapist
                    lifestyle, prevention of illness and/or preparation
                    for coping with increasing stages of illness.

                                                                               3229 THERAPISTS NEC
                RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                               Workers in this unit group plan and apply physical
                Occupational therapist                                         and therapeutic treatments and activities to assist
                                                                               recovery from illness and to minimise the effects of
                                                                               disabilities not elsewhere classified in MINOR
  1                                                                            GROUP 322: Therapists.
                3223 SPEECH AND LANGUAGE
                     THERAPISTS
                Speech and language therapists are responsible for             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                the assessment, diagnosis and treatment of speech,             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  2             language, fluency and voice disorders caused by
                disability, injury or illness.                                 Entrants usually possess an accredited degree or
                                                                               postgraduate qualification. Training can take
                                                                               between two to five years depending upon the chosen
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                       method of study. Courses provide a mixture of
  3             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                      theoretical study and practical experience.
                                                                               Membership of professional bodies may be
                Entrants require a recognised graduate or                      mandatory in some areas.
                postgraduate degree that encompasses both theory
                and clinical practice. Successful completion of these
                courses leads to eligibility for a certificate to practice
  4             and membership of the Royal College of Speech and
                                                                               TASKS
                Language Therapists. Full membership is granted                • prescribes diet therapy and gives advice to
                after completion of a year of supervised post                     patients, health care professionals and the
                qualifying experience.                                            public on dietetic and nutritional matters for
                                                                                  those with special dietary requirements or to
  5                                                                               prevent illness amongst the general
                TASKS                                                             population;

                                                                               • diagnoses and treats disorders of vision and eye
                • assesses and diagnoses a clients condition;                     movements, monitors subsequent progress and
                • designs and initiates an appropriate remedial                   recommends further optical, pharmacological or
  6                 programme of treatment;                                       surgical treatment as required;

                • treats speech and language disorders by coaching             • manipulates and massages patient to discover the
                    clients or through the use of artificial                      cause of pain, relieve discomfort, restore function
                    communication devices;                                        and mobility and to correct irregularities in body
                                                                                  structure;
  7             • attends case conferences and liaises with other
                                                                               • inserts needles under the skin, administers
                    specialists such as doctors, teachers, social
                    workers and psychologists;                                    aromatic herbs and oils and massages body to
                                                                                  relieve pain and restore health;
                • counsels relatives to help cope with the problems
                    created by a patients disability;                          • assesses and provides treatment for people with
  8             • writes reports and maintains client caseloads.
                                                                                  mental disabilities, or those suffering with mental
                                                                                  illness.




  9

                116       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                Major Group 3
RELATED JOB TITLES

Acupuncturist
Dietician
Masseur
Orthoptist
Osteopath
Psychotherapist




                                                                                 1


                                                                                 2


                                                                                 3


                                                                                 4


                                                                                 5


                                                                                 6


                                                                                 7


                                                                                 8


                                                                                 9

                     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   117
Major Group 3



                                       MINOR GROUP 323
                            SOCIAL WELFARE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
                Social welfare associate professionals direct, organise and provide social welfare and related
                community services, assess and address the housing needs of individuals or localities,
                assist those with physical and mental disabilities or illnesses, investigate cases of abuse or
                neglect and perform other welfare functions.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       3231 YOUTH AND COMMUNITY WORKERS
  1
                       3232 HOUSING AND WELFARE OFFICERS


                3231 YOUTH AND COMMUNITY                                      • works with tenants to improve facilities on
  2                  WORKERS                                                     housing estates, helps set up credit unions,
                                                                                 encourages parents to establish playgroups,
                Youth and community workers provide support to                   works with other groups to find solutions to
                individuals or groups of individuals through a range             shared concerns or problems.
                of activities or services that aim to encourage
                participation in social, political and community
  3             activities.                                                   RELATED JOB TITLES

                                                                              Community worker
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      Day centre officer
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     Youth leader
  4                                                                           Youth worker
                There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                Most qualified youth workers possess an accredited
                diploma in higher education or postgraduate diploma
                in youth and community work. A majority of                    3232 HOUSING AND WELFARE
                qualifying courses are for people aged over 21.                    OFFICERS
  5
                                                                              Housing and welfare officers assess and address
                TASKS                                                         housing needs of particular localities and individuals,
                                                                              assist the blind, deaf, sick, elderly, physically
                • organises social, recreational and educational              handicapped and mentally ill with problems relating
  6                activities in youth groups and local community             to their condition, investigate cases of child neglect
                                                                              or ill treatment and perform other welfare tasks not
                   centres;
                                                                              elsewhere classified.
                • undertakes the day-to-day running of community
                   centres and supervises the activities of part-time
                   and voluntary workers;
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  7             • liaises and supports voluntary workers running              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                   groups in village halls, churches, mosques and
                   other places of worship;                                   Entry is possible with a variety of academic
                                                                              qualifications and/or relevant work experience.
                • advises individuals with particular needs or                NVQs/SVQs in Housing are available at Levels 2, 3
  8                problems through informal discussion, individual
                   counselling or formal group discussion;
                                                                              and 4. Professional qualifications are available and
                                                                              may be required for some posts.




  9

                118      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 3
TASKS

• oversee the day-to-day running of rented
   properties including arranging for the signing of
   leases, rent collection, maintenance work,
   interviewing prospective tenants and allocating
   properties to waiting list applicants;

• ensures that special needs accommodation is
   suited to the needs of particular groups such as
   the elderly and disabled, and that statutory
   requirements for providing accommodation are
   met;
                                                                                                                    1
• investigates allegations of child neglect or abuse,
   liaises with other social workers, probation
   officers and the police and, where necessary,
   recommends legal action;

• helps the handicapped and sick to adjust to the                                                                   2
   limitations imposed by their condition and
   arranges for any necessary alterations in the
   home;

• performs other welfare tasks not elsewhere
   classified including working in a Citizens Advice                                                                3
   Bureau, developing community participation in
   planning issues and organising local authority
   home help services.


                                                                                                                    4
RELATED JOB TITLES

Advice worker
Care officer
Counsellor (welfare services)
Education welfare officer                                                                                           5
Housing officer
Welfare officer



                                                                                                                    6


                                                                                                                    7


                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   119
Major Group 3



                                      SUB-MAJOR GROUP 33
                                PROTECTIVE SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in protective service occupations serve in the armed forces, the police force, fire
                service, prison service and perform other protective service roles.


                                             MINOR GROUP 331
                                      PROTECTIVE SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this minor group serve in Her Majesty's, foreign and Commonwealth armed
  1             forces, investigate crimes and maintain law and order, fight fires and advise on fire
                prevention, guard inmates and maintain discipline at prisons and detention centres, and
                perform other miscellaneous protective service roles.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
  2
                       3311 NCOs AND OTHER RANKS
                       3312 POLICE OFFICERS (SERGEANT AND BELOW)
                       3313 FIRE SERVICE OFFICERS (LEADING FIRE OFFICER AND
  3                         BELOW)
                       3314 PRISON SERVICE OFFICERS (BELOW PRINCIPAL OFFICER)
                       3319 PROTECTIVE SERVICE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS NEC

  4
                3311 NCOs AND OTHER RANKS                                     • stands watch and guards military establishments
                                                                                 and other buildings;
                Workers in this unit group are full-time members of
  5             the armed forces of the UK, the Commonwealth and              • trains and exercises using various military
                other foreign countries and perform duties for which             equipment and tactics;
                there is no civilian equivalent.
                                                                              • patrols areas of possible military activity;
                                                                              • leads and trains new recruits and lower ranks.
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  6             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                For a majority of positions entry does not depend
                upon academic qualifications. Entrants generally
                                                                              Airman/woman
                have to pass a selection interview, physical and
                                                                              Corporal
  7             medical examination. Entry to certain trades requires
                GCSEs/S grades or equivalent qualifications.
                                                                              Petty officer
                                                                              Private
                                                                              Sapper
                                                                              Sergeant
                TASKS                                                         Sergeant-Major
  8             • monitors, operates, services and repairs military
                   equipment;




  9

                120      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 3
3312 POLICE OFFICERS                                    3313 FIRE SERVICE OFFICERS
     (SERGEANT AND BELOW)                                    (LEADING FIRE OFFICER
                                                             AND BELOW)
Police officers (Sergeant and below) co-ordinate and
undertake the investigation of crimes, patrol public    Workers in this unit group co-ordinate and participate
areas, arrest offenders and suspects and enforce law    in fire fighting activities, advise on fire prevention
and order.                                              and salvage goods during and after fires.


TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                               ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no academic requirements for entry to the     There are no formal academic requirements although          1
civilian (Home Office) police although graduates        some brigades may specify certain GCSEs/S grades.
may apply for accelerated promotion. Entrants must      Good colour vision without spectacles or contact
sit an entry test and pass a medical examination. All   lenses is required. Candidates must also pass a
police officers undergo a two year probationary         medical examination and a strength test. Initial
training period.                                        training lasts between 3 and 4 months and is followed
                                                        by a two year probationary period of assessment.
                                                                                                                    2

TASKS
                                                        TASKS
• receives instructions from senior officers and                                                                    3
   patrols an assigned area on foot, horseback,         • inspects premises to identify potential fire
   motorcycle, motor car or boat to check security           hazards and to check that statutory fire fighting
   and enforce regulations;                                  equipment is available and in working order;

• directs and controls traffic or crowds and            • arranges fire drills and tests alarm systems and
                                                             equipment;
   demonstrations;                                                                                                  4
• investigates complaints, crimes, accidents, any       • travels to fire or other emergency by vehicle and
   suspicious activities or other incidents;                 locates water mains if necessary;

• interviews suspects, takes statements from            • operates hose pipes, ladders, chemical, foam, gas
                                                             or powder fire extinguishing appliances;
   witnesses and stops, searches and/or arrests
   suspects;
                                                                                                                    5
                                                        • rescues people or animals trapped by fire and
                                                             administers first aid;
• prepares briefs or reports for senior officers;
                                                        • removes goods from fire damaged premises,
• gives evidence in court cases.                             clears excess water, makes safe any structural
                                                             hazards and takes any other necessary steps to         6
                                                             reduce damage to property.
RELATED JOB TITLES

Detective sergeant                                      RELATED JOB TITLES
Police constable
Police officer                                          Fire officer (coal mine)                                    7
Policeman                                               Fire fighter (fire service)
                                                        Fireman (fire service)


                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   121
Major Group 3



                3314 PRISON SERVICE OFFICERS                                  national borders, monitor maritime conditions,
                     (BELOW PRINCIPAL OFFICER)                                undertake search and rescue operations and perform
                                                                              other security and protective service occupations not
                Prison service officers (below Principal Officer)             elsewhere classified in MINOR GROUP 331:
                direct, co-ordinate and participate in guarding               Protective Service Occupations.
                inmates and maintaining discipline in prisons and
                other detention centres.
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     These posts have varying entry requirements. Some
                                                                              posts require no academic qualifications whereas
  1             Entrants require GCSEs/S grades or equivalent                 others require GCSEs/S grades and/or relevant
                                                                              practical experience. Entry to some occupations is
                qualifications. Candidates must be between 20 and
                                                                              followed by periods of assessed probationary
                49 years old in England and Wales or between 20
                                                                              training and professional examinations.
                and 57 years old in Scotland. Candidates must pass
                a pre-entry test and full medical examination. Basic
                training lasts for a period of 11 weeks and is followed
  2             by a 12 month probationary period.                            TASKS

                                                                              • examines, weighs and counts goods imported by
                                                                                 ship or aircraft, ensures that the declared value
                TASKS                                                            of goods is satisfactory and that duties and taxes
                                                                                 have been paid;
  3             • escorts prisoners to and from cells and supervises
                    them during meals, recreation and visiting periods;       • examines passports, visas, work permits and
                                                                                 other immigration documents, and allows or
                • watches for any infringements of regulations and               refuses entry into the UK;
                    searches prisoners and cells for weapons, drugs
                    and other contraband items;                               • maintains revenue control at breweries, tobacco
  4                                                                              factories and other premises where dutiable
                • guards entrances and perimeter walls;                          goods are manufactured, processed or stored;
                • investigates disturbances or any other unusual              • visits racecourses, greyhound stadiums and
                    occurrences;                                                 betting shops to ensure compliance with legal
                                                                                 requirements;
  5             • escorts prisoners transferred from one institution
                    to another;                                               • broadcasts information on weather and maritime
                                                                                 conditions, monitors shipping and provides
                •   reports on prisoners' conduct as necessary.                  instruction to navigators;

                                                                              • receives distress messages, alerts other
  6             RELATED JOB TITLES                                               appropriate rescue services and participates in
                                                                                 search and rescue operations;
                Prison officer
                                                                              • photographs, fingerprints and undertakes other
                Warder (prison service)
                                                                                 forms of forensic examination at the scene of a
                                                                                 crime.
  7
                3319 PROTECTIVE SERVICE
                     ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS                                  RELATED JOB TITLES
                     NEC
                                                                              Coastguard
                Workers in this unit group inspect goods to ensure            Coastguard officer
  8             compliance with regulations concerning payment of             Customs and Excise officer
                duty, establish that persons entering and leaving the         Emergency planning officer
                UK have necessary authorisation for crossing                  Scenes of crime officer (civilian)



  9

                122      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 3
                  SUB-MAJOR GROUP 34
        CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORTS OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this sub-major group create and restore artistic works; write, edit and evaluate
literary material; perform in acts of entertainment; arrange and perform musical
compositions; produce television, film and stage presentations; present television and radio
broadcasts; operate camera, sound and lighting equipment; promote the image of
organisations, goods and services; design commercial and industrial products; compete in
sporting events for financial gain; and provide training and instruction for sporting and
recreational activities.
                                                                                                                    1
                            MINOR GROUP 341
                  ARTISTIC AND LITERARY OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group create and restore artistic work, write, evaluate and edit literary                     2
material, translate written and spoken statements, perform in films, theatre and other acts
of entertainment, write, arrange and perform musical compositions, and produce television
programmes, films and stage presentations.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:                                      3
       3411   ARTISTS
       3412   AUTHORS, WRITERS
       3413   ACTORS, ENTERTAINERS                                                                                  4
       3414   DANCERS AND CHOREOGRAPHERS
       3415   MUSICIANS
       3416   ARTS OFFICERS, PRODUCERS AND DIRECTORS
                                                                                                                    5

3411 ARTISTS                                            TASKS

Workers in this unit group create artistic works by     • conceives and develops ideas for artistic
painting, drawing, printing, sculpting and engraving,        composition;                                           6
design artwork and illustrations, and restore damaged
pieces of art.                                          • selects appropriate materials, medium and method;
                                                        • prepares sketches, scale drawings or colour
                                                             schemes;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                • builds up composition into finished work by
                                                                                                                    7
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                    carving, sculpting, etching, painting, engraving
                                                             and drawing;
No specific academic qualifications are required
although a variety of GNVQs/GSVQs, BTEC/SQA             • approaches managers of galleries and exhibitions
awards and degrees are available.                            in order to get finished work displayed.               8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   123
Major Group 3


                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            Editor
                                                                              Freelance writer
                Animator (cartoon films)                                      Interpreter
                Artist                                                        Script writer
                Illustrator                                                   Translator
                Picture restorer
                Sculptor
                                                                              3413 ACTORS, ENTERTAINERS
                3412 AUTHORS, WRITERS                                         Actors and entertainers sing, portray roles in
                                                                              dramatic productions, perform comedy routines,
                Workers in this unit group write, edit and evaluate           gymnastic feats and tricks of illusion, train animals
  1             literary material for publication (excluding material         to perform and perform with them.
                for newspapers, magazines and other periodicals)
                and translate spoken and written statements into
                different languages.
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  2             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      Entry does not depend on academic qualifications
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     although some drama schools require candidates to
                                                                              have GCSEs/S grades or A levels/H grades. Entry
                Entry is possible with a variety of academic                  to drama schools is usually based upon an audition.
                qualifications and/or relevant experience.                    Some colleges prefer students to be under 25 years
  3             Postgraduate and professional qualifications are              of age. Membership of the appropriate Trades Union
                available and are required for some occupations.              is usually required. GNVQs/GSVQs and BTEC/
                                                                              SQA awards in Performing Arts are available.

                TASKS
  4             • determines subject matter and researches as
                                                                              TASKS

                   necessary by interviewing, attending public                • studies script, play or book and prepares and
                   events, seeking out records, etc.;                            rehearses interpretation;
                • selects material for publication, checks style,             • assumes character created by a playwright or
  5                grammar and accuracy of content, arranges for
                   any necessary revisions and checks proof copies
                                                                                 author and communicates this to an audience;

                   before printing;                                           • performs singing, comedy, illusion and conjuring
                                                                                 routines;
                • negotiates contracts with freelance agents and
                   with buyer on behalf of writer;                            • trains animals to perform entertaining routines
                                                                                 and may perform with them;
  6             • writes instruction manuals and user guides,
                   technical reports, catalogues and indexes,                 • plays pre-recorded music at nightclubs,
                   prepares sales literature and writes technical                discotheques, and private functions.
                   articles for trade journals;

                • converts documents or spoken statements from
  7                original or source language into another
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                   language.                                                  Actor
                                                                              Disc jockey
                                                                              Entertainer
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            Singer (entertainment)
  8
                Author
                Author (technical)



  9

                124      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                      Major Group 3
3414 DANCERS AND                                          Entry to a degree or graduate diploma course requires
     CHOREOGRAPHERS                                       A levels/H grades. Entrants to the performers'
                                                          diploma course generally possess GCSEs/S grades
Dancers and choreographers devise, direct, rehearse       and Associated Board examination passes in their
and perform classical and contemporary dance              chosen instrument(s) and will be required to audition
routines.                                                 for places.



TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                  TASKS
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                          • conceives and writes original music;
There are no formal academic requirements,
although some dance schools may require candidates        • tunes instrument and studies and rehearses score;          1
to have passed relevant dance exams. Entry to most
courses is via audition. Some dance schools may state
                                                          • plays instrument as a soloist or as a member of a
minimum and maximum height requirements.                       group or orchestra;
Performers' courses typically last three years and lead   • scores music for different combinations of
to a diploma or certificate awarded by the school.             voices and instruments to produce desired
Some degree courses are also available.                        effect;
                                                                                                                       2
                                                          • auditions and selects performers and rehearses
TASKS                                                          and conducts them in the performance of the
                                                               composition.
• builds and maintains stamina, physical strength,
   agility and general health through fitness
                                                                                                                       3
   exercises and healthy eating;
                                                          RELATED JOB TITLES
• attends rehearsals to develop and practice dance
   routines for performance;                              Cellist
                                                          Composer (music)
• demonstrates and directs dance moves, monitors          Musician                                                     4
   and analyses technique and performance, and            Organist
   determines how improvements can be made.               Pianist
                                                          Violinist

RELATED JOB TITLES                                                                                                     5
                                                          3416 ARTS OFFICERS,
Ballet dancer                                                  PRODUCERS AND
Ballet teacher
                                                               DIRECTORS
Choreographer
Dance instructor                                          Arts officers, producers and directors assume
Dancer                                                    creative, financial and organisational responsibilities      6
                                                          in the production of television programmes, films,
                                                          stage presentations and the promotion and exhibition
3415 MUSICIANS                                            of other cultural activities.

Musicians write, arrange, orchestrate, conduct and
perform musical compositions.
                                                                                                                       7
                                                          TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                          ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                  Entry does not depend on academic qualifications although
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                 many entrants possess BTEC/SQA awards, diplomas or
                                                          degrees in theatre, drama, stage management or media         8
There are no formal academic entry requirements           related courses. Training is received on-the-job,
although many possess degrees or diploma courses.         supplemented by specialist courses.


                                                                                                                       9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   125
Major Group 3


                TASKS

                • chooses writers, scripts, technical staff and
                   performers, and assumes overall responsibility
                   for completion of project on time and within
                   budget;

                • directs actors, designers, camera team, sound
                   crew and other technical staff to achieve desired
                   effects;

                • breaks script into scenes and formulates a
                   shooting schedule that will be most economical
  1                in terms of time, location and sets;

                • prepares rehearsal and production schedule for
                   main events, design of sets and costumes,
                   technical rehearsals and dress rehearsals;

  2             • ensures necessary equipment, props, performers
                   and technical staff are on set when required;

                • selects, contracts, markets and arranges for the
                   presentation of performance, visual and heritage
                   arts.
  3
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Arts development officer
                Arts officer
  4             Entertainment agent
                Producer (entertainment)
                Stage manager (entertainment)
                Studio manager

  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                126     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                     Major Group 3
                              MINOR GROUP 342
                      DESIGN ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
Workers in this minor group use visual, audio, multimedia and other techniques to convey
information for publicity, promotional and advertising purposes, design industrial and
commercial products, clothing and fashion accessories.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       3421 GRAPHIC DESIGNERS
       3422 PRODUCT, CLOTHING AND RELATED DESIGNERS                                                                   1


3421 GRAPHIC DESIGNERS                                    RELATED JOB TITLES

Graphic designers using illustrative, sound, visual       Commercial artist
                                                                                                                      2
and other multimedia techniques to convey a               Graphic artist
message for information, advertising, promotion or        Graphic designer
publicity purposes.


                                                          3422 PRODUCT, CLOTHING AND
                                                                                                                      3
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                       RELATED DESIGNERS
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                          Product, clothing and related designers plan, direct
Entrants have usually completed a foundation course,      and undertake the creation of designs for new
an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, a BTEC/SQA
award, a degree and/or postgraduate qualification.
                                                          industrial and commercial products, clothing and            4
                                                          related fashion accessories.
An NVQ/SVQ in Graphic Design is available at
Level 2.
                                                          TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND

TASKS
                                                          ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                   5
                                                          Entrants have usually completed a foundation course,
• liaises with client to clarify aims of project brief,   an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, a BTEC/SQA
   discusses media to be used, establishes timetable      award, a degree and/or postgraduate qualification.
   for project and defines budgetary constraints;         NVQs/SVQs in Fashion Design and Design are
• undertakes research into project, considers
                                                          available at Level 2.                                       6
   previous related projects and compares costs of
   using different processes;
                                                          TASKS
• prepares sketches, scale drawings, models,
   colour schemes and other mock-ups to show              • liaises with client to determine the purpose, cost,
   clients and discusses any required alterations;             technical specification and potential uses/users
                                                                                                                      7
                                                               of product;
• prepares instructions for printers, specifies
   typefaces, size, alignments and other formatting       • undertakes research to determine market
   requirements.                                               trends;
                                                                                                                      8


                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   127
                • prepares sketches, designs, patterns or prototypes
Major Group 3



                   for textiles, clothing, footwear, jewellery, fashion
                   accessories, ceramics, plastics, motor vehicles,
                   domestic appliances and engineering products;

                • submits design to management, sales department
                   and client for approval and makes any necessary
                   alterations;

                • oversees production of sample product.


                RELATED JOB TITLES
  1
                Clothing designer
                Commercial designer
                Fashion designer
                Furniture designer
  2             Industrial designer
                Interior designer
                Textile designer



  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                128      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 3
                                       MINOR GROUP 343
                       MEDIA ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
Workers in this minor group write, evaluate and edit literary material for newspapers and
periodicals, present, direct and produce television and radio broadcasts, promote the image
and understanding of organisations and operate camera, sound, video and lighting equipment.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       3431    JOURNALISTS, NEWSPAPER AND PERIODICAL EDITORS
       3432    BROADCASTING ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS                                                                  1
       3433    PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICERS
       3434    PHOTOGRAPHERS AND AUDIO-VISUAL EQUIPMENT
               OPERATORS
                                                                                                                     2
3431 JOURNALISTS, NEWSPAPER                              RELATED JOB TITLES
     AND PERIODICAL EDITORS
                                                         Journalist
Journalists, newspaper and periodical editors write,
evaluate and edit literary material for publication in
                                                         News editor (newspaper)                                     3
                                                         Reporter (newspaper)
newspapers, magazines and other periodicals.
                                                         Sports writer
                                                         Sub-editor

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                                                                            4
There are no formal academic requirements although       3432 BROADCASTING ASSOCIATE
entrants usually possess a degree. A variety of               PROFESSIONALS
postgraduate diplomas are available. NVQs/SVQs
covering various aspects of journalism are available
at Levels 3 and 4.
                                                         Broadcasting associate professionals introduce,             5
                                                         present and participate in radio and television
                                                         programmes, research material for broadcasts, and
                                                         assume organisational and financial responsibility
TASKS                                                    for the production of television and radio
• determines subject matter and undertakes               programmes.                                                 6
   research by interviewing, attending public events,
   seeking out records, reviewing written work,
   attending film and stage performances etc.;           TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
• writes articles and features and submits draft         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
   manuscripts to newspaper, magazine or                                                                             7
   periodical editor;                                    There are no formal academic requirements although
                                                         entrants usually possess a degree and have
• selects material for publication, checks style,        experience in journalism and/or broadcasting.
   grammar, accuracy and legality of content and
                                                         Training is usually on-the-job supplemented by
   arranges for any necessary revisions;
                                                         professionally recognised training courses. NVQs/
• liaises with production staff in checking final        SVQs in Broadcast Journalism are available at Level         8
   proof copies immediately prior to printing.           4.




                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   129
                                                                              • writes, edits and arranges for the effective
Major Group 3


                TASKS
                                                                                 distribution of press releases, news letters and
                • introduces radio and television programmes,                    other public relations material;
                   reads news bulletins and makes announcements;
                                                                              • addresses individuals, clients and other target
                • conducts interviews and prepares reports for                   groups through meetings, presentations, the
                   news broadcasts, current affairs programmes and               media and other events to enhance the public
                   documentaries;                                                image of an organisation;
                • directs actors and briefs designers, camera                 • develops and implements tools to monitor and
                   operators, sound recordists and editors on the                evaluate the effectiveness of public relations
                   effect to be achieved;                                        exercises.
                • assumes financial and organisational
  1                responsibility for the completion of television
                   programmes on time and within budget;                      RELATED JOB TITLES
                • edits film and videotape to assemble shots in the           Information officer
                   required sequence.
                                                                              Press officer
  2                                                                           Public relations consultant
                                                                              Publicity assistant
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Broadcaster
                News reporter (broadcasting)                                  3434 PHOTOGRAPHERS AND
  3             Production assistant (broadcasting)                                AUDIO-VISUAL EQUIPMENT
                Radio journalist                                                   OPERATORS
                Television producer
                Video editor                                                  Workers in this unit group operate and assist with
                                                                              still, cine and television cameras and operate other
                                                                              equipment to record and project sound and vision
  4                                                                           for entertainment, commercial and industrial
                3433 PUBLIC RELATIONS                                         purposes.
                     OFFICERS
                Public relations officers promote the image and
                understanding of an organisation and its products or          TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  5             services to consumers, businesses, members of the             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                public and other specified audiences.
                                                                              There are no set academic requirements although
                                                                              entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, A levels/
                                                                              H grades and are able to demonstrate proof of pre-
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      entry work experience. A variety of BTEC/SQA
  6             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     awards, diplomas, degrees and postgraduate
                                                                              qualifications are available. NVQs/SVQs in
                There are no formal academic entry requirements,
                                                                              Photography are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.
                although entrants usually possess A levels/H grades
                and a degree or equivalent qualification. Training
                is typically received on-the-job and supplemented
  7             by short courses or qualifications provided by                TASKS
                professional institutions.
                                                                              • selects subject and conceives composition of
                                                                                 picture or discusses composition with colleagues;
                TASKS                                                         • arranges subject, lighting, camera equipment and
  8             • discusses issues of business strategy, products,
                                                                                 any microphones;
                   services and target client base with management            • checks that camera is loaded, inserts lenses and
                   to identify public relations requirements;                    adjusts aperture and speed settings as necessary;


  9

                130      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• photographs subject or follows action by moving




                                                                                                                   Major Group 3
   camera;

• checks operation and positioning of projectors,
   videotape machines, mobile microphones and
   mixing and dubbing equipment;

• operates telecine, projection and video
   equipment to record and play back films and
   television programmes;

• operates sound mixing and dubbing equipment
   to obtain desired mix, level and balance of sound.
                                                                                                                    1
RELATED JOB TITLES

Audio visual technician
Camera operator (film, television production)
Film technician
                                                                                                                    2
Photographer
Press photographer
Projectionist
Sound recordist
                                                                                                                    3


                                                                                                                    4


                                                                                                                    5


                                                                                                                    6


                                                                                                                    7


                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   131
Major Group 3



                                               MINOR GROUP 344
                                       SPORTS AND FITNESS OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this minor group prepare for and compete in sporting events for financial gain,
                train amateur and professional sportsmen and women to enhance performance, promote
                participation and standards in sport, organise and officiate sporting events, and provide
                instruction, training and supervision for various forms of exercise and other recreational
                activities.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

  1                    3441    SPORTS PLAYERS
                       3442    SPORTS COACHES, INSTRUCTORS AND OFFICIALS
                       3443    FITNESS INSTRUCTORS
                       3449    SPORTS AND FITNESS OCCUPATIONS NEC
  2
                3441 SPORTS PLAYERS                                           RELATED JOB TITLES

                Professional sportsmen and women train and                    Cricketer
  3             compete, either individually or as part of a team, in         Footballer
                their chosen sport for financial gain.                        Golfer
                                                                              Jockey

                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  4             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     3442 SPORTS COACHES,
                                                                                   INSTRUCTORS AND
                No academic qualifications are required. Entry is
                based upon talent that can be further developed
                                                                                   OFFICIALS
                through coaching and training.                                Sports coaches, instructors and officials work with
                                                                              amateur and professional sportsmen and women to
  5                                                                           enhance performance, encourage greater
                TASKS                                                         participation in sport, and organise and officiate
                                                                              sporting events according to established rules.
                • participates in exhibitions, pre-qualifying events,
                   tournaments and competitions;
  6             • attends training sessions to develop skills and             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                   practice individual or team moves and tactics;

                • builds stamina, physical strength and agility               There are no formal academic requirements although
                   through running, fitness exercises and weight              individuals must have experience in their sport and
                                                                              the relevant coaching and refereeing qualifications.
  7                training;
                                                                              Applicants to coaching courses must normally be
                • maintains clothing and other specialised sporting           over 18 years old and hold a first aid certificate.
                   equipment;                                                 Some courses encompass coaching awards within
                                                                              broader programmes of study such as BTEC/SQA
                • discusses performance problems with coaches,                awards. NVQs/SVQs are available in the context
  8                physiotherapists, dieticians and doctors.                  of certain sports.




  9

                132      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 3
TASKS                                                    TASKS

• coaches teams or individuals by demonstrating          • assesses the fitness levels of clients;
   techniques and directing training and exercise
   sessions;                                             • devises programmes of training appropriate to
                                                              the needs of clients with varying levels of
• controls team selection and discipline and                  strength, fitness and ability;
   recruits ancillary staff such as coaches or
   physiotherapists;                                     • ensures that clients do not injure themselves
                                                              through over exertion or using incorrect training
• monitors and analyses technique and                         techniques;
   performance, and determines how future
   improvements can be made;                             • plans and monitors personal fitness schedules;

• deals with administrative aspects such as              • understands the health and safety aspects of              1
   arranging matches, contests or appearances for             different forms of exercise and ensures that any
   athlete or team, and organising required transport         statutory requirements are met.
   and accommodation;

• provides information and develops facilities to        RELATED JOB TITLES                                          2
   encourage greater participation in sport, and to
   enhance the standards of participants;                Aerobics instructor
• starts race, competition or match and controls         Fitness consultant
   its progress according to established rules.          Keep fit teacher
                                                                                                                     3
RELATED JOB TITLES                                       3449 SPORTS AND FITNESS
                                                              OCCUPATIONS NEC
Referee
Sports coach                                             Workers in this unit group instruct and supervise
Sports development officer                               clients in a variety of recreational activities such as     4
Steward (horse racing)                                   climbing, canoeing and mountaineering.
Swimming teacher
Umpire
                                                         TYPICAL ENTRY REQUIREMENTS
                                                                                                                     5
                                                         There are no formal academic requirements.
3443 FITNESS INSTRUCTORS                                 Entrants must possess a variety of coaching
Fitness instructors deliver training in aerobics, keep   qualifications recognised by the appropriate
                                                         governing bodies and usually have considerable
fit, weight training and other forms of exercise at
                                                         practical experience. Applicants to coaching courses
private health and fitness centres or local authority
run sports and leisure centres.
                                                         must normally be 18 years old and hold a first aid          6
                                                         certificate.


TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTE AND                                  TASKS
ASSORTED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                         • devises programmes of activities to suit the needs
                                                                                                                     7
There are no formal academic requirements.                    of clients with varying levels of strength, fitness
Entrants however must possess coaching                        and ability;
qualifications recognised by the appropriate
governing body. Applicants to coaching courses           • understands the health and safety aspects of
must normally be over 18 years old and hold a first
aid certificate.
                                                              different forms of recreational activity and
                                                              ensures that any statutory requirements are met;
                                                                                                                     8


                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   133
                • inspects and maintains specialised clothing and
Major Group 3



                   other sporting equipment;

                • arranges transportation and accommodation for
                   participants.



                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Outdoor pursuits instructor
                Outward bound tutor
                Riding instructor
  1


  2


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                134      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                     Major Group 3
                    SUB-MAJOR GROUP 35
          BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATE
                      PROFESSIONALS
Business and public service associate professionals command and control the movement
of air, sea and rail traffic; organise the administrative work of legal practices; perform
specialist financial tasks; purchase goods and materials; provide technical sales advice to
clients; undertake market research, recruitment, training and industrial relations activities;
arrange for the trading and leasing of property on behalf of clients; undertake the planning,
promotion and maintenance of areas of the environment; perform administrative functions
in government; and undertake statutory inspections of health and safety.                                              1

                          MINOR GROUP 351
                  TRANSPORT ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS                                                                   2
Workers in this minor group command and navigate aircraft and vessels, drive trains, perform
technical functions to operate and maintain such craft, and plan and regulate the ground
and air movements of aircraft.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:                                        3
       3511    AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS
       3512    AIRCRAFT PILOTS AND FLIGHT ENGINEERS
       3513    SHIP AND HOVERCRAFT OFFICERS                                                                           4
       3514    TRAIN DRIVERS


3511 AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS                              supervised practical experience leading to the
                                                          award of a Civil Aviation Authority licence.                5
Air traffic controllers prepare flight plans, authorise
flight departures and arrivals and maintain radio,
radar and/or visual contact with aircraft to ensure
                                                          TASKS
the safe movement of air traffic.
                                                          • maintains radio and/or radar or visual contact            6
                                                               with aircraft and liaises with other air traffic
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                       controllers and control centres to direct aircraft
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                      in and out of controlled airspace and into holding
                                                               areas ready for landing;
Entrants must be aged between 18 and 27 at time
of application. Entrants require GCSEs/S grades           • gives landing instructions to pilot and monitors          7
and A levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award or an                  descent of aircraft;
Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III. Academic                    • directs movement of aircraft and motor vehicles
requirements may be lowered for those with                     on runways, taxiways and in parking bays;
relevant aviation experience. Candidates must
have good eyesight and no hearing or speech               • obtains information regarding weather                     8
defects. Entrants are required to undergo a                    conditions, navigational hazards, landing
medical examination. Training lasts 74 weeks and               conditions, seating arrangements, loading of
consists of courses of study followed by                       cargo, fuel and catering supplies;


                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   135
                • calculates fuel consumption and optimum flying
Major Group 3


                                                                                  air traffic control and aircraft operating
                   height, plans route and prepares flight plan for               procedures;
                   aircraft pilot;
                                                                               • monitors fuel consumption, air pressure, engine
                • discusses operational requirements with pilot,                  performance and other indicators during flight
                   issues duty schedules for flight deck and cabin                and advises pilot of any factors that affect the
                   crews, maintains records of flight progress and                navigation or performance of the aircraft;
                   authorises flight departure.
                                                                               • maintains radio contact and discusses weather
                                                                                  conditions with air traffic controllers;
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                             • performs specified tests to determine aircraft's
                                                                                  stability, response to controls and overall
  1             Air traffic controller
                Controller of aircraft
                                                                                  performance;

                Flight planner                                                 • accompanies pupil on training flights and
                Ground movement controller (airport)                              demonstrates flying techniques.


  2                                                                            RELATED JOB TITLES
                3512 AIRCRAFT PILOTS AND
                     FLIGHT ENGINEERS                                          Airline captain
                                                                               Airline pilot
                Aircraft flight deck officers check, regulate, adjust          Commercial pilot
                and test engines and other equipment prior to take-            Flight engineer
  3             off, navigate and pilot aircraft and give flying lessons.      Flying instructor
                                                                               Pilot

                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                      3513 SHIP AND HOVERCRAFT
  4                                                                                 OFFICERS
                Entrants with GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H grades,
                an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III or a BTEC/                     Ship and hovercraft officers command and navigate
                SQA award can apply for an airline sponsorship.                ships and other craft, co-ordinate the activities of
                Private residential training is available to candidates        officers and deck and engine room ratings, operate
                with GCSEs/S grades or appropriate BTEC/SQA or                 and maintain communications equipment on board
  5             GNVQ/GSVQ awards or to holders of Private Pilots               ship and undertake minor repairs to engines, boilers
                Licences who have 700 hours flying experience.                 and other mechanical and electrical equipment.
                Normal colour vision is required and candidates
                undergo a medical examination. Training lasts up
                to 15 months and consists of courses of study and              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  6             flying instruction. Airlines may have additional age           ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                and height requirements.
                                                                               Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades and A
                                                                               levels/H grades. Good colour vision without
                                                                               spectacles or contact lenses is required for some
                TASKS                                                          posts and candidates must undergo a medical
  7                                                                            examination. Training lasts three to four years and
                • studies flight plan, discusses it with flight deck           combines taught courses and assessed training at sea.
                   crew and makes any necessary adjustments;

                • directs or undertakes routine checks on engines,
                   instruments, control panels, cargo distribution             TASKS
  8                and fuel supplies;
                                                                               • allocates duties to ship's officers and co-ordinates
                • directs or undertakes the operation of controls                 and directs the activities of deck and engine room
                   to fly aeroplanes and helicopters, complying with              ratings;


  9

                136       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• directs or undertakes the operation of controls           • starts train when directed and operates controls




                                                                                                                       Major Group 3
   to inflate air cushions, run engines and propel               to regulate speed;
   and steer ships, hovercraft and other vessels;
                                                            • watches for track hazards, observes signals and
• locates the position of vessel using electronic and            temperature, pressure and other gauges;
   other navigational aids such as charts and
   compasses and advises on navigation where                • stops as directed to allow passengers to embark/
   appropriate;                                                  disembark, the loading and unloading of freight
                                                                 and coupling/uncoupling of carriages and tubs;
• monitors the operation of engines, generators and
   other mechanical and electrical equipment and            • checks safety equipment, regulates the heating
   undertakes any necessary minor repairs;                       of passenger compartments and records engine
                                                                 defects or unusual incidents on the journey.
• maintains radio contact with other vessels and                                                                        1
   coast stations;

• prepares watch keeping rota and maintains a               RELATED JOB TITLES
   look-out for other vessels or obstacles;
                                                            Engine driver (railways)
• maintains log of vessel's progress, weather               Locomotive driver
                                                                                                                        2
   conditions, conduct of crew, etc.                        Train driver



RELATED JOB TITLES

Chief engineer (hovercraft)                                                                                             3
Master mariner
Navigator (shipping)
Ship's captain (merchant navy)
Ship's officer (merchant navy)
                                                                                                                        4
3514 TRAIN DRIVERS
Train drivers drive diesel, diesel-electric, electric and
steam locomotives that transport passengers and
goods on surface and underground railways.
                                                                                                                        5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                        6
There are no formal academic requirements.
Entrants must pass a medical examination. Good
hearing, good eyesight and normal colour vision are
required. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.
An NVQ/SVQ in Rail Transport (Driving) is
available at Level 2.
                                                                                                                        7

TASKS

• checks controls, gauges, brakes and lights before                                                                     8
   start of journey and studies route, timetable and
   track information;


                                                                                                                        9

                                                            Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   137
Major Group 3



                                                MINOR GROUP 352
                                         LEGAL ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
                Legal associate professionals organise the administrative work of legal practices and perform
                specialised legal duties.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit group:

                   3520         LEGAL ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS

  1                                                                            RELATED JOB TITLES
                3520 LEGAL ASSOCIATE
                     PROFESSIONALS
                                                                               Barrister's clerk
                Workers in this unit group provide administrative              Conveyancer
                support for legal professionals, and investigate and           Data protection officer
  2             make recommendations on legal matters that do not              Legal assistant
                fall within the province of a normal court of law.             Legal executive



                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  3             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades and A
                levels/H grades in appropriate subject areas. Off-
                and on-the-job training is available. Membership
                of professional institutions will be required for some
  4             posts. Candidates must pass professional
                examinations and complete up to five years of
                practical experience.



  5             TASKS

                • runs chambers on behalf of principals, develops
                   the practice, manages the flow of work, decides
                   which cases to accept, arranges appropriate fees
                   and prepares financial records;
  6
                • collates information, drafts briefs and other
                   documents;

                • interviews and advises clients, undertakes
                   preparatory work for court cases;
  7             • attends court to assist barristers and solicitors in
                   the presentation of a case;

                • assists in all aspects of property conveyancing
                   and probate and common law practice.
  8


  9

                138       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                       Major Group 3
                      MINOR GROUP 353
       BUSINESS AND FINANCE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
Business and finance associate professionals calculate the probable costs of projects, assess
the value of properties, underwrite insurance policies and assess liability regarding claims,
deal in commodities and financial assets, advise clients on insurance, investment, taxation,
mortgages, pensions and other financial matters, and assist accounting and financial
professionals in managing an organisations financial affairs.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       3531    ESTIMATORS, VALUERS AND ASSESSORS
                                                                                                                        1
       3532    BROKERS
       3533    INSURANCE UNDERWRITERS
       3534    FINANCE AND INVESTMENT ANALYSTS/ADVISERS
       3535    TAXATION EXPERTS
                                                                                                                        2
       3536    IMPORTERS, EXPORTERS
       3537    FINANCIAL AND ACCOUNTING TECHNICIANS
       3539    BUSINESS AND RELATED ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS NEC
                                                                                                                        3

3531 ESTIMATORS, VALUERS AND                              • assesses condition, location, desirability and
     ASSESSORS                                                 amenities of property to be valued;

Estimators, valuers and assessors plan and undertake      • assesses costs of materials, labour time and other          4
the calculation of probable costs of civil, mechanical,        factors such as required profit margins, transport
electrical, electronic and other projects, estimate the        costs, tariffs and fare structures, possible hazards,
value of property and chattels, and investigate                etc.;
insurance claims to assess their validity and to assign
                                                          • prepares comprehensive estimates of time and
liability.
                                                               costs and presents these in report or tender form;       5
                                                          • examines insurance documents to assess
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                       extent of liability and gathers information
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                      about incident from police, medical records,
                                                               ship's log, etc. and investigates potential
Entry is possible with a variety of academic                   fraudulent claims.                                       6
qualifications. Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S
grades, A levels/H grades, GNVQs/GSVQs or
BTEC/SQA awards. Professional qualifications are          RELATED JOB TITLES
available and may be required by some employers.
                                                          Building estimator                                            7
                                                          Estimator
TASKS                                                     Insurance assessor
                                                          Planner-estimator
• examines plans, drawings, specifications, parts         Surveyor and valuer
                                                          Valuation surveyor
   lists, etc. and specifies the materials and
   components required;                                   Valuer
                                                                                                                        8


                                                                                                                        9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   139
Major Group 3



                3532 BROKERS                                                  RELATED JOB TITLES

                Workers in this unit group deal in commodities,               Commodity trader
                stocks, shares and foreign exchange on behalf of              Financial broker
                clients or on own account, broker insurance and               Foreign exchange dealer (banking)
                reinsurance, and buy and sell shipping and freight            Insurance broker
                space.                                                        Shipbroker
                                                                              Stockbroker

                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              3533 INSURANCE UNDERWRITERS
  1             There are no formal academic requirements although
                many employers require entrants to possess a degree           Workers in this unit group identify and measure the
                or equivalent qualification. Training is typically            risks associated with an activity, determine whether
                undertaken in-house, although entrants may attend             this risk is insurable and issue insurance polices
                courses run by professional institutions. Registration        which provide financial compensation in the event
                with a regulatory authority may be required in some
  2             positions.
                                                                              of loss.



                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                TASKS                                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  3             • advises client on the suitability of particular             There are no formal academic requirements,
                   insurance schemes and places insurance on
                                                                              although many employers expect entrants to study
                   behalf of client;
                                                                              for the associateship examinations of the Chartered
                • discusses buying and/or selling requirements of             Insurance Institute. Entrants to professional
                   client and gives advice accordingly;                       examinations usually require GCSEs/S grades and
  4             • analyses information concerning market trends
                                                                              A levels/H grades, an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ
                                                                              Level III, or a BTEC/SQA award.
                   for commodities, financial assets and foreign
                   exchange and advises client/employer on the
                   suitability of a particular investment;
                                                                              TASKS
  5             • records and transmits buy and sell orders for
                   stocks, shares and bonds and calculates                    • receives and assesses proposals and
                   transaction costs;                                            propositions for insurance from brokers and
                                                                                 clients;
                • provides independent advice on the suitability
                   of insurance schemes and places insurance on               • identifies and evaluates the risks associated with
  6                behalf of client;                                             a proposal;

                • arranges for the production of auction catalogues,          • liaises with insurance surveyors, actuaries and
                   fixes reserve prices, attends auction and bids on             risk managers where the risks associated with a
                   behalf of client, or negotiates purchase/sale by              proposal are not clear;
                   private treaty of goods not sold at auction;
  7             • obtains cargo space, fixes freight charges and
                                                                              • calculates premiums, provides quotations and,
                                                                                 if acceptable to the client, issues policies;
                   signs and issues bills of loading;
                                                                              • ensures that the insurance policy clearly defines
                • collects freight charges from client and                       the liabilities accepted and any exceptions or
                   undertakes all necessary formalities                          exclusions;
  8                concerning customs and the loading/unloading
                   of cargo.                                                  • negotiates terms of reinsurance contracts.




  9

                140      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                  Major Group 3
RELATED JOB TITLES                                     3535 TAXATION EXPERTS
Insurance underwriter                                  Taxation experts advise clients on tax matters and
Underwriter                                            assess tax liabilities.



3534 FINANCE AND INVESTMENT                            TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
     ANALYSTS/ADVISERS                                 ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Workers in this unit group advise customers on the     Entry is possible with GCSEs/S grades or a BTEC/
purchase of investment, insurance, mortgages,          SQA award, although many entrants possess a degree
pensions and other financial services and products.    or equivalent qualification. A professional
                                                       qualification is required in either accountancy or          1
                                                       taxation. Training is undertaken on-the-job and
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                               usually takes approximately four years to complete.
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic requirements although
entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades. Training
                                                       TASKS                                                       2
is typically undertaken in-house, although entrants
may attend courses run by professional institutions.
                                                       • examines accounts of industrial, commercial and
Registration with a regulatory authority may be             other establishments to determine their tax
required in some positions.                                 liability and makes adjustments to claims where
                                                            necessary;
                                                                                                                   3
                                                       • considers particular problems concerning all
TASKS
                                                            forms of personal and company taxation;
• predicts the long and short term future              • stays abreast of all changes in tax law and
   performance of securities and other financial
   assets and advises upon what will be a good
                                                            precedent;
                                                                                                                   4
   investment for their clients;                       • discusses disputed cases with accountants and
• analyses the financial position of clients, taking        other specialists;
   into account outgoings, dependants and
                                                       • represents Government/client in contested
   commitments;

• advises on the relative merits of pension schemes,
                                                            claims before tax officials or an independent
                                                            tribunal.
                                                                                                                   5
   insurance policies and mortgages that best meet
   the needs of clients given their personal
   circumstances;
                                                       RELATED JOB TITLES
• undertakes administrative duties on behalf of                                                                    6
   clients;                                            Inspector of taxes
                                                       Tax consultant
• identifies and attracts new clients by arranging     Tax senior
   visits and explaining the benefits of financial     Taxation adviser
   products.
                                                                                                                   7
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                       3536 IMPORTERS, EXPORTERS
Financial adviser
Financial consultant                                   Importers and exporters buy commodities from
Mortgage consultant                                    overseas for the home market and sell home-                 8
Pension adviser                                        produced commodities to overseas markets.




                                                                                                                   9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   141
Major Group 3


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      Association of Chartered Certified Accountants and
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     the Association of Accounting Technicians. These
                                                                              qualifications can be linked to NVQs/SVQs in
                Entry does not depend on academic qualifications              Accounting at Levels 2, 3 and 4. Exemptions to
                although some employers require candidates to have            professional examinations may be granted to those
                a degree or equivalent qualification. Some posts              with certain academic qualifications.
                require candidates to have knowledge of a foreign
                language. Professional qualifications are available.
                Entrance to professional examinations requires                TASKS
                GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H grades or equivalent
                qualifications.                                               • maintains profit and loss accounts, budgets,
                                                                                 cashflow forecasts and other accounting records;
  1                                                                           • produces, collates and reports financial
                TASKS
                                                                                 information for managers;
                • investigates and evaluates home and overseas                • liaises with clients to ensure that payments are
                   demand for particular commodities;
                                                                                 made on time and credit limits are not exceeded;
  2             • obtains orders from buyers and arranges payment             • ensures invoices and payments are correct and
                   by bill of exchange, letter of credit or other
                                                                                 sent out on time;
                   means;
                                                                              • monitors accounting systems to determine
                • arranges for shipment of commodities overseas                  accounts are being maintained effectively and
                   and ensures that insurance and export licences
                                                                                 provides information on accounting practices to
  3                are in order;
                                                                                 auditors.
                • carries out customs clearance procedures for
                   imports, arranges their storage and delivery and
                   sells them personally or through a commodity               RELATED JOB TITLES
                   broker;
  4                                                                           Accounting technician
                • advises home and overseas producers on the                  Financial controller
                   likely future demand for their goods.


                                                                              3539 BUSINESS AND RELATED
                RELATED JOB TITLES
  5                                                                                ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
                Export agent                                                       NEC
                Exporter
                Importer                                                      Workers in this unit group advise on the effectiveness
                                                                              of an organisation's procedures, systems and
  6                                                                           methods, organise business conferences and
                                                                              exhibitions and perform other business and related
                3537 FINANCIAL AND                                            occupations not elsewhere classified in MINOR
                     ACCOUNTING TECHNICIANS                                   GROUP 353: Business and Finance Associate
                                                                              Professionals.
                Financial and accounting technicians work alongside
  7             accountants and other financial professionals in
                managing the financial affairs of organisations.              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      There are no formal academic entry requirements,
  8             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     although entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades,
                                                                              A levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award or equivalent
                There are no formal academic requirements.                    qualifications. Professional qualifications are
                Professional qualifications are available from the            available and may be required by some employers.


  9

                142      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                     Major Group 3
TASKS

• studies particular department or problem area and
   assesses its interrelationships with other
   activities;

• studies work methods and procedures by
   measuring work involved and computing
   standard times for specified activities, and
   produces report detailing suggestions for
   increasing efficiency and lowering costs;

• analyses project components, organises them into
   a logical sequence and establishes the minimum                                                                     1
   time required for the project;

• purchases services, receives payment from
   clients, processes contracts and deals with
   contractual arrangements;
                                                                                                                      2
• canvasses political opinion, writes and distributes
   leaflets, writes and distributes press releases and
   other such material to promote the image and
   policies of a political party or election candidate,
   arranges fund raising activities, and organises and
   participates in election campaigns;                                                                                3
• discusses requirements for conferences,
   exhibitions, functions or similar events, advises
   on the facilities available, makes booking
   arrangements and undertakes and makes any
   further preparations required.                                                                                     4

RELATED JOB TITLES

Conference co-ordinator                                                                                               5
Exhibition officer
Management information officer
Work study engineer
Work study officer

                                                                                                                      6


                                                                                                                      7


                                                                                                                      8


                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   143
Major Group 3



                                      MINOR GROUP 354
                         SALES AND RELATED ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
                Sales and related associate professionals purchase raw materials, equipment and
                merchandise, provide technical sales advice to customers, undertake market research, and
                arrange for the trading and leasing of property on behalf of clients.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       3541    BUYERS AND PURCHASING OFFICERS
  1                    3542    SALES REPRESENTATIVES
                       3543    MARKETING ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
                       3544    ESTATE AGENTS, AUCTIONEERS


  2             3541 BUYERS AND PURCHASING                                    • prices merchandise, places repeat orders for fast
                     OFFICERS                                                    selling goods and arranges for promotions or
                                                                                 price reductions for slow selling lines;
                Buyers and purchasing officers organise and
                undertake the buying of raw materials, equipment              • maintains records and prepares reports as
  3             and merchandise from manufacturers, importers,
                wholesalers and other sources for wholesale
                                                                                 necessary.

                distribution, resale or for own internal use.
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES

                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      Assistant buyer
  4             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     Buyer
                                                                              Media buyer
                There are no formal academic requirements although            Procurement officer
                many employers expect A levels/H grades, BTEC/
                SQA awards or degrees. Professional qualifications
  5             and NVQs/SVQs in Procurement at Levels 2, 3 and
                4 are available.
                                                                              3542 SALES REPRESENTATIVES
                                                                              Sales representatives provide advice to existing
                TASKS
                                                                              and potential customers, and receive orders for
  6             • attends trade fairs, shows and displays to examine          specialist machinery, equipment, materials and
                                                                              other products or services that require technical
                   new product lines, examines price lists and
                   samples and selects the most suitable supplier             knowledge.
                   or places tenders with suitable firms;

                • assesses budgetary limitations and customer                 TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  7                requirements and decides on quantity, type, range          ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                   and quality of goods or services to be bought;
                                                                              There are no formal academic requirements,
                • helps negotiate contract with supplier and
                   specifies details of goods or services required;           although entrants usually possess academic
                                                                              qualifications and/or relevant experience in a
  8             • ensures that delivered items comply with order,             particular profession or speciality. Training is usually
                   monitors quality of incoming goods and returns             on-the-job. Professional qualifications and NVQs/
                   unsatisfactory or faulty items;                            SVQs at Levels 2 and 3 are available.



  9

                144      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                 Major Group 3
TASKS                                                      employer or client in order to identify
                                                           marketing requirements;
• discusses customer requirements and advises
   them on the capabilities and limitations of the    • establishes an appropriate quantitative and
   goods or services being sold;                           qualitative market research methodology and
                                                           prepares proposals outlining programmes of
• quotes prices, credit details, delivery dates and        work and details of costs;
   payment arrangements and arranges for delivery
   and installation of goods if appropriate;          • collates and interprets findings of market
                                                           research and presents results to clients;
• makes follow up visits to ensure customer
   satisfaction and to obtain further orders;         • discusses possible changes that need to be made
                                                           in terms of design, price, packaging, promotion
• stays abreast of advances in product/field and
   suggests possible improvements to product or
                                                           etc. in light of market research with appropriate      1
                                                           departments;
   service;
                                                      • briefs advertising team on client requirements,
• maintains records and accounts of sales made             monitors the progress of advertising campaigns
   and handles customer complaints.                        and liaises with client on potential modifications.
                                                                                                                  2
RELATED JOB TITLES                                    RELATED JOB TITLES

Manufacturer's agent                                  Account representative (advertising)
Salesman/woman (wholesale)                            Commercial officer
Technical representative                              Market researcher
                                                                                                                  3
                                                      Marketing consultant

3543 MARKETING ASSOCIATE
     PROFESSIONALS
                                                      3544 ESTATE AGENTS,                                         4
Marketing associate professionals assist in the            AUCTIONEERS
development and implementation of projects which
aim to elicit the preferences and requirements of     Estate agents and auctioneers arrange for the
consumers, businesses and other specified target      valuation, sale, purchase, rental and leasing of
groups so that suppliers may meet these needs.        property on behalf of clients.                              5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic requirements,            Entry is most common via membership of the                  6
although many entrants possess a BTEC/SQA award,      Professional Society for Valuers, Auctioneers and
A levels/H grades, a degree or equivalent             Estate Agents. Entrants to professional training
qualification. Training is typically in-house,        possess GCSEs/S grades, an NVQ/SVQ at Level 2,
supplemented by short courses or professional         an Intermediate GNVQ/GSVQ Level II and/or
qualifications provided by the Market Research
Society. NVQs/SVQs in Marketing Research are
                                                      relevant experience. Off- and on-the-job training is
                                                      taken over a two year period.
                                                                                                                  7
available at Levels 3 and 4.

                                                      TASKS
TASKS
                                                      • discusses client's requirements and may advise            8
• discusses business methods, products or                  client on the purchase of property and land for
   services and targets customer group with                investment and other purposes;


                                                                                                                  9

                                                      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   145
                • conducts or arranges for structural surveys of
Major Group 3



                   properties and undertakes any necessary
                   valuations of property or agricultural land;

                • advises vendors and purchasers on market prices
                   of property, accompanies clients to view
                   property;

                • markets the property on behalf of the vendor,
                   prepares written information and press
                   advertisements;

                • negotiates land or property purchases, sales,
  1                leases or tenancy agreements and arranges legal
                   formalities with solicitors, building societies and
                   other parties;

                • makes inventories of property for sale, advises
                   vendor of suitable reserve price, issues
  2                catalogues, conducts auction, notes bids and
                   records sale.



                RELATED JOB TITLES
  3             Auctioneer
                Estate agent
                Land agent
                Letting agent

  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                146     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 3
                        MINOR GROUP 355
              CONSERVATION ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
Workers in this minor group are responsible for the planning, management, promotion and
day-to-day maintenance of areas of the environment in ways that are of benefit to wildlife
and the public.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       3551 CONSERVATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
            OFFICERS
                                                                                                                    1
       3552 COUNTRYSIDE AND PARK RANGERS



3551 CONSERVATION AND                                   • organises and supervises conservation projects            2
     ENVIRONMENTAL                                           and the work of part-time and voluntary staff;
     PROTECTION OFFICERS                                • provides information to the public through setting
                                                             up displays, writing leaflets, making presentations
Conservation and environmental protection officers
                                                             and addressing the media.
are responsible for the scientific planning and daily
running of areas of the environment in a way that
                                                                                                                    3
reconciles the interests of conservation, land owners
and the public.                                         RELATED JOB TITLES

                                                        Conservation officer
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                        Conservationist
                                                        Environmental protection officer
                                                                                                                    4
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                        National park officer
Entrants usually possess a BTEC/SQA higher award
or degree although some employers may require a
higher degree or postgraduate qualification. Modern
Apprenticeships and NVQs/SVQs in Environmental
                                                        3552 COUNTRYSIDE AND PARK                                   5
Conservation at Levels 2 and 3 are also available.           RANGERS
                                                        Countryside and park rangers look after the
                                                        countryside for the benefit of wildlife and the public
TASKS                                                   through practical conservation, environmental
                                                        education and liaison between land owners, local            6
• conducts ecological surveys to identify plant and     communities and visitors.
   animal species, map their habitat and draw up
   conservation plans;

• liaises with conservation organisations, planning     TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
   authorities and land owners to establish nature      ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                   7
   reserves and Sites of Special Scientific Interest,
   and to identify and protect buildings and areas      Entrants usually possess a BTEC/SQA higher award
   of historical interest;                              or degree although some employers may require a
                                                        higher degree or postgraduate qualification. A
• carries out environmental assessments as to the       majority of entrants have prior practical experience.
   consequences of proposed new developments;           A range of training courses from professional               8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   147
Major Group 3


                associations and NVQs/SVQs in Environmental
                Conservation at Levels 2 and 3 are available.



                TASKS

                • advises visitors, organises guided walks and
                   answers questions from the public about an area
                   and its wildlife;

                • encourages environmental education through
                   addressing schools and community groups;
  1             • patrols an area to monitor damage, erosion,
                   access to rights of way and the state of footpaths
                   and other facilities, and carries out remedial
                   maintenance work as necessary;

                • acts as an intermediary between land owners,
  2                visitors and the local community in disputes over
                   rights of access;

                • works with the emergency services in instances
                   of fire, flood, injury or mountain rescue.
  3
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Countryside ranger
                Countryside warden
  4             Environmental warden
                Park ranger




  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                148     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                      Major Group 3
                             MINOR GROUP 356
                   PUBLIC SERVICE AND OTHER ASSOCIATE
                             PROFESSIONALS
Public service and other associate professionals supervise and undertake general
administrative functions in national and local government, advise upon and undertake
recruitment, staff appraisal and industrial relations activities, give advice regarding careers,
training and related opportunities, provide vocational training, undertake inspections and
investigations to ensure statutory compliance, implement health and safety measures within
establishments and organisations, and undertake inspections to ensure compliance with
environmental health regulations.                                                                                      1
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       3561 PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
       3562 PERSONNEL AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS OFFICERS                                                                2
       3563 VOCATIONAL AND INDUSTRIAL TRAINERS AND
            INSTRUCTORS
       3564 CAREERS ADVISERS AND VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE
            SPECIALISTS                                                                                                3
       3565 INSPECTORS OF FACTORIES, UTILITIES AND TRADING
            STANDARDS
       3566 STATUTORY EXAMINERS
       3567 OCCUPATIONAL HYGIENISTS AND SAFETY OFFICERS                                                                4
            (HEALTH AND SAFETY)
       3568 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICERS


3561 PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATE                              TASKS                                                       5
     PROFESSIONALS
                                                           • co-ordinates activities of office staff, assigns
Public service associate professionals supervise and            tasks and responsibilities and makes changes in
undertake general administrative work in national               procedures to deal with variations in workload;
and local government departments, and organise the
activities of local offices of national government         • assists senior government officers with policy            6
departments.                                                    work, external liaison or general administrative
                                                                work;

                                                           • supervises a variety of administrative functions
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                        in government departments such as recruitment
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                       and training, the negotiation and arrangement of       7
                                                                contracts, building and capital management,
Entrants typically possess A levels/H grades or an              monitoring and authorising department
equivalent qualification, although many entrants                expenditure etc.;
possess a degree. Entry may be possible by promotion
from clerical grades for those with suitable experience.   • organises resources for the acceptance and
Training is typically provided on-the-job,                      recording of vacancy details, the selection of
                                                                                                                       8
supplemented by specialised courses. Professional               suitable applicants and other Job Centre
qualifications are available in some areas.                     activities;


                                                                                                                       9

                                                           Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   149
                • authorises the payment of social security benefits,         • arranges meetings between management and
Major Group 3



                   arranges for domiciliary visits to assess the                 employees or trades unions and assists with
                   financial circumstances of claimants and                      negotiations concerning pay and conditions of
                   investigates any state insurance contribution                 employment;
                   problems;
                                                                              • advises on training and recruitment, negotiating
                • advises public or companies on general tax                     procedures, salary agreements and other
                   problems and arranges for the issue, receipt and              personnel and industrial relations issues;
                   examination of tax forms, assessment of PAYE
                   codes and the computation of tax arrears and               • provides practical recruitment and selection
                   rebates.                                                      services to clients such as preparing
                                                                                 advertisements, checking application forms and
                                                                                 interviewing candidates.
  1             RELATED JOB TITLES

                Higher executive officer (government)                         RELATED JOB TITLES
                Principal officer (local government)
                Senior executive officer (government)                         Industrial relations officer
  2                                                                           Personnel officer
                                                                              Recruitment consultant


                3562 PERSONNEL AND
                     INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS                                     3563 VOCATIONAL AND
  3                  OFFICERS                                                      INDUSTRIAL TRAINERS AND
                                                                                   INSTRUCTORS
                Personnel and industrial relations officers conduct
                research and advise on recruitment, training, staff           Vocational and industrial trainers provide instruction
                appraisal and industrial relations policies and assist        in manual, manipulative and other vocational skills
                specialist managers with negotiations on behalf of a          and advise on, plan and organise vocational
  4             commercial enterprise, trades union or other                  instruction within industrial, commercial and other
                organisation.                                                 establishments.



                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  5             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no formal academic requirements although            No formal educational qualifications are required
                most entrants possess a degree or equivalent                  for entry, although most entrants have qualified in
                qualification and/or relevant experience. Many                some other area of work. Professional qualifications
                employers expect staff to gain membership of the              are available from the Institute of Personnel and
  6             Institute of Personnel Development through study              Development. NVQs/SVQs in Training and
                for professional qualifications. NVQs/SVQs in                 Development are available at Levels 3, 4 and 5.
                Personnel Support are available at Level 3.

                                                                              TASKS
  7             TASKS                                                         • assesses training requirements and prepares
                                                                                 lectures, demonstrations and study aids;
                • undertakes research into pay differentials,
                   productivity and efficiency bonuses and other              • supervises trainee development, assists trainees
                   payments;                                                     with difficulties and prepares regular progress
                                                                                 reports on each trainee for management;
  8             • develops and recommends personnel and
                   industrial relations policies and assists with their       • arranges work experience and instructional visits
                   implementation;                                               for trainees;



  9

                150      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• plans curriculum and rota of staff duties and        • liaises with employers to determine employment




                                                                                                                  Major Group 3
   updates or amends them in light of developments;         opportunities and advises schools, colleges or
                                                            individuals accordingly;
• advises on training programmes and discusses
   progress or problems with staff and trainees;       • organises careers forums and exhibitions and
                                                            establishes and maintains contact with local
• devises general and specialised training courses          employers and/or training organisations and
   in response to particular needs.                         TECs;

                                                       • monitors progress and welfare of young people
RELATED JOB TITLES                                          in employment and advises them on any
                                                            difficulties.
Staff trainer
Technical instructor                                                                                               1
Training consultant                                    RELATED JOB TITLES
Training instructor
Training officer                                       Careers adviser
                                                       Careers officer
                                                       Placement co-ordinator
                                                       Placement officer
                                                                                                                   2
3564 CAREERS ADVISERS AND
     VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE
     SPECIALISTS                                       3565 INSPECTORS OF FACTORIES,
Workers in this unit group give advice on careers or
                                                            UTILITIES AND TRADING                                  3
occupations, training courses and related matters,          STANDARDS
direct school leavers and other job seekers into
                                                       Inspectors of factories, utilities and trading standards
employment and assess their progress.
                                                       undertake investigations and inspections to verify
                                                       and ensure compliance with acts, regulations and
                                                       other requirements regarding weights, measures and          4
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                               trade descriptions, the installation and safety of
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                              electrical, gas and water supplies and equipment and
                                                       the welfare, health and safety in factories and all
Entrants to training usually possess a degree, an      work sites subject to the provisions in the Factory
approved diploma or equivalent qualification.          Acts.
Professional training towards the Diploma in Careers                                                               5
Guidance consists of a one-year full-time course
followed by a one-year probationary period of on-
                                                       TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
the-job training.
                                                       ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                                                       Entrants usually possess A levels/H grades, a degree        6
TASKS                                                  or equivalent qualification. Professional
                                                       qualifications, postgraduate diplomas and NVQs/
• uses an interview, questionnaire and/or              SVQs at Levels 3 and 4 are available and may be
   psychological or other test to determine the        required in some occupations.
   aptitude, preferences and temperament of the
   client;                                                                                                         7
• advises on appropriate courses of study or           TASKS
   avenues into employment;
                                                       • inspects measuring and similar equipment in
• visits educational and other establishments to            factories and visits street traders, shops, garages
   give talks and distribute information regarding          and other premises to check scales, weights and        8
   careers;                                                 measuring equipment;




                                                                                                                   9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   151
Major Group 3


                • inspects factories and other work sites to ensure           TASKS
                   adequate cleanliness, temperature, lighting and
                   ventilation, checks for fire hazards and inspects          • verifies the weight of vehicles, checks drivers
                   storage and handling arrangements of dangerous                licence and the number of hours worked;
                   materials;
                                                                              • takes regular samples of river water for
                • visits sites during construction and inspects                  laboratory analysis and removes any diseased fish
                   completed installations of electricity, gas or water          from the river;
                   supply;                                                    • visits premises discharging effluent into river and
                                                                                 advises on ways of preventing pollution;
                • draws attention to any irregularities or
                   infringements of regulations and advises on ways           • prevents illegal fishing and inspects and verifies
                   of rectifying them;
  1                                                                              fishing licences;
                • investigates industrial accidents or any                    • visits kennels, race courses, slaughterhouses and
                   complaints made by the public, prepares                       other areas where animals are kept, investigates
                   reports and recommendations on all                            any complaints and advises on animal care;
                   inspections made and recommends legal
                                                                              • provides first aid treatment for animals and
  2                action where necessary.
                                                                                 undertakes humane killing where necessary;

                                                                              • undertakes other inspections not elsewhere
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                               classified, including alkali, drugs, explosives,
                                                                                 flight operations, horticulture, wages and mining
                Gas inspector
  3             Inspector of factories (government)
                                                                                 inspections.

                Inspector of weights and measures
                Installation inspector (electricity, gas)                     RELATED JOB TITLES
                Plumbing inspector
                Trading standards officer                                     Driving examiner (Dept of Transport)
  4                                                                           Fishery officer
                                                                              Flight examiner
                                                                              National Insurance inspector
                3566 STATUTORY EXAMINERS                                      Pollution control officer
                                                                              RSPCA inspector
  5             Workers in this unit group undertake investigations           Water bailiff
                and inspections to ensure compliance with bye-laws,
                acts and other regulations concerning river pollution
                and use of fishing grounds, the condition and                 3567 OCCUPATIONAL HYGIENISTS
                standard of ships' structures, equipment and                       AND SAFETY OFFICERS
                accommodation, the treatment of animals, the
  6             operation of commercial, passenger and road goods
                                                                                   (HEALTH AND SAFETY)
                vehicles and other miscellaneous concerns/issues not          Workers in this unit group counsel employees on
                elsewhere classified.                                         personal, domestic and other problems and
                                                                              grievances, advise on industrial health and safety and
                                                                              co-ordinate accident prevention and safety measures
  7             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      within an establishment or organisation.
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Entry is most common with experience gained in                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                employment, but is possible with GCSEs/S grades               ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  8             or A levels/H grades. On-the-job training is provided
                and professional qualifications are available and are         Entrants usually possess an NVQ/SVQ at Level 4 in
                required for some posts.                                      Occupational Health and Safety Practice or a national



  9

                152      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                      Major Group 3
diploma awarded by the National Examination Board          Environmental Health requires candidates to possess
in Occupational Safety and Health. After three years       an accredited degree or postgraduate qualification
relevant experience, holders of these qualifications can   and to complete a year of assessed practical training
apply for membership of the Institution of                 and further professional examinations.
Occupational Safety and Health.

                                                           TASKS
TASKS
                                                           • inspects and investigates housing and working
• assists employees in need of accommodation and                conditions, conditions under which food, drink
   maintains contact with those off work due to illness;        and drugs are manufactured and stored,
                                                                atmospheric pollution, drainage, sewage and
• counsels individuals on any personal or domestic
   problems affecting their work;
                                                                refuse disposal, noise levels, etc. to ensure          1
                                                                compliance with government regulations;
• inspects factory and other work areas to ensure          • makes visits and inspections in accordance with
   compliance with health and safety legislation;               a planned programme or in response to
                                                                complaints;
• instructs workers in the proper use of protective
   clothing and safety devices;                            • advises on ways of rectifying conditions that
                                                                                                                       2
• compiles statistics on accidents and injuries,                contravene regulations;
   analyses their causes and makes                         • prepares reports and recommendations on all
   recommendations to management accordingly;                   inspections made;
• gives talks and distributes information on               • recommends legal action in cases of persistent            3
   accident prevention;                                         contravention of regulations.
• carries out routine tests on safety devices and
   protective clothing.
                                                           RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                       4
                                                           Authorised meat inspector
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                           Environmental health inspector
                                                           Environmental health officer
Health and Safety officer
                                                           Public health officer
Occupational hygienist
Safety adviser                                                                                                         5
Safety officer



3568 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
     OFFICERS                                                                                                          6
Environmental health officers undertake inspections
and investigations to verify and ensure compliance
with government acts, orders and regulations relating
to environmental hygiene and the general health of
the public.                                                                                                            7

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                       8
Entry will require GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H
grades. Registration to the Chartered Institute of



                                                                                                                       9

                                                           Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   153
                                                                                                          Major Group 4
                     MAJOR GROUP 4
             ADMINISTRATIVE AND SECRETARIAL
                      OCCUPATIONS
Occupations within this major group undertake general administrative, clerical and
secretarial work, and perform a variety of specialist client-orientated clerical duties. The
main tasks involve retrieving, updating, classifying and distributing documents,
correspondence and other records held electronically and in storage files; typing, word-
processing and otherwise preparing documents; operating other office and business
machinery; receiving and directing telephone calls to an organisation; and routing
information through organisations.                                                                         1

Most occupations in this major group will require a good standard of general education.
Certain occupations will require further additional vocational training or professional
occupations to a well-defined standard.                                                                    2
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:

41 ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS                                                                              3
    411    ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: GOVERNMENT AND
           RELATED ORGANISATIONS
    412    ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: FINANCE                                                             4
    413    ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: RECORDS
    414    ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: COMMUNICATIONS
    415    ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: GENERAL

42 SECRETARIAL AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
                                                                                                           5
    421    SECRETARIAL AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS

                                                                                                           6


                                                                                                           7


                                                                                                           8


                                                                                                           9

                                               Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   155
Major Group 4



                                          SUB-MAJOR GROUP 41
                                      ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this sub-major group undertake administrative and clerical work in government
                departments and non-governmental organisations; perform specialist clerical tasks in relation
                to financial records and transactions, the administration of pension and insurance policies,
                the storage and transportation of freight, the activities of libraries, market research and
                database administration; operate telecommunications equipment and perform other general
                clerical tasks.

  1
                                    MINOR GROUP 411
                      ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: GOVERNMENT AND
                                RELATED ORGANISATIONS
  2             Workers in this minor group undertake a variety of administrative and clerical work in
                government departments and non-governmental organisations.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

  3                    4111    CIVIL SERVICE EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
                       4112    CIVIL SERVICE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND ASSISTANTS
                       4113    LOCAL GOVERNMENT CLERICAL OFFICERS AND ASSISTANTS
                       4114    OFFICERS OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS
  4
                4111 CIVIL SERVICE EXECUTIVE                                  • undertakes random or regular checks of work to
                     OFFICERS                                                    assess output and quality;

                                                                              • ensures that accounting, verifying, recording and
  5             Workers in this unit group undertake administrative
                duties within government offices and departments,                other prescribed procedures are adhered to;
                and supervise the activities of junior administrative
                and clerical staff.
                                                                              • advises on the purchase of office equipment and
                                                                                 supplies;

                                                                              • assists senior government officers with policy
  6             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                         work, external liaison or general administrative
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                        work;
                Entry is possible with GCSEs/S grades and A levels/           • undertakes administrative and supervisory duties
                H grades, BTEC/SQA awards or GNVQs/GSVQs,                        specific to the operation of Inland Revenue
                although many entrants are graduates. Off- and on-               offices, Job Centres, Benefits Agency offices and
  7             the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs and
                professional qualifications are available for certain
                                                                                 other local offices of national government.
                areas of work.

                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                TASKS
  8                                                                           Adviser (Job Centre)
                • plans work schedules, assigns duties and supervises         Executive officer (government)
                   the activities of administrative and clerical staff;       Revenue executive (government)



  9

                156      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                  Major Group 4
4112 CIVIL SERVICE                                     TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
     ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS                           ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
     AND ASSISTANTS                                    Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades.
Civil Service administrative officers and assistants   Evidence of keyboard skills may also be required in
undertake a variety of clerical work in national       some posts. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.
government departments, and in local offices of        NVQs/SVQs in Administration are available at
national government departments.                       Levels 2 and 3.


TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                               TASKS
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                       • computes cost of product/services and maintains           1
Entry is possible with GCSEs/S grades, and/or               and balances records of financial transactions;
relevant practical experience. NVQs/SVQs in
Administration are available at Levels 2 and 3.        • prepares and checks invoices and verifies
Modern Apprenticeships leading to NVQ/SVQ at                accuracy of records;
Level 3 are also available.
                                                       • receives and pays out cash and cheques and                2
                                                            performs closely related clerical duties;
TASKS
                                                       • operates data processing equipment to update
• maintains and updates correspondence,                     and maintain data, correspondence and other
                                                            records for storage or despatch;
   documents, data and other records for storage in
   files or on computer;
                                                                                                                   3
                                                       • arranges, classifies and indexes publications,
• classifies, sorts and files publications,                 correspondence and other material in libraries
   correspondence etc. in offices and libraries;            and offices;
• responds to telephone enquiries and other forms      • performs other clerical duties not elsewhere
   of correspondence;                                       classified including preparing financial               4
• undertakes a variety of clerical tasks specific to        information for management, proof reading
   the operations of Inland Revenue offices, Job            printed material and drafting letters in reply to
   Centres, Benefits Agency offices and other local         correspondence or telephone enquiries.
   offices of national government;
• performs miscellaneous clerical tasks such as
                                                                                                                   5
   proof reading printed material, drafting letters,   RELATED JOB TITLES
   taking minutes etc.
                                                       Administrative assistant (local government)
                                                       Clerical assistant (local government)
RELATED JOB TITLES                                     Clerical officer (local government)
                                                       Local government officer
                                                                                                                   6
Administrative assistant (government)
Administrative officer (government)
Revenue assistant (government)
                                                       4114 OFFICERS OF NON-
                                                            GOVERNMENTAL                                           7
4113 LOCAL GOVERNMENT                                       ORGANISATIONS
     CLERICAL OFFICERS AND
     ASSISTANTS                                        Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
                                                       administrative and clerical tasks in the running of
Local government clerical officers and assistants      trade associations, employers' associations, learned        8
undertake a variety of clerical duties in local        societies, trade unions, charitable organisations and
government offices and departments.                    similar bodies.



                                                                                                                   9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   157
Major Group 4


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no formal academic requirements although
                pre-entry experience is usually necessary. Some
                organisations only employ their own members,
                although evidence of related work within pressure
                groups, the voluntary sector, trade unions or other
                organisations is generally sufficient.



                TASKS
  1
                • maintains and updates records of membership
                   details, subscription fees, mailing lists, etc.;

                • circulates and reports information of relevance
                   to members and interested parties;
  2             • arranges meetings, conferences and other events
                   and circulates agenda and other relevant material;

                • receives and responds to written and telephone
                   correspondence from members and other
  3                organisations;

                • undertakes fund raising activities within a
                   specified geographical area;

                • prepares and provides measures of organisational
                   activity for senior officials.
  4
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Branch secretary (charitable organisation)
  5             Charity administrator
                Official (trade union)
                Organiser (trade union)



  6


  7


  8


  9

                158      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 4
                          MINOR GROUP 412
                ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: FINANCE
Workers in this minor group perform administrative and other tasks in relation to credit
control and debt collection, the maintenance of financial records within firms, financial
transactions made with customers and the collection of payments from businesses and
households.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       4121 CREDIT CONTROLLERS
                                                                                                                     1
       4122 ACCOUNTS AND WAGES CLERKS, BOOK-KEEPERS, OTHER
            FINANCIAL CLERKS
       4123 COUNTER CLERKS

                                                                                                                     2
4121 CREDIT CONTROLLERS                                  RELATED JOB TITLES

Credit controllers perform financial, administrative     Credit control clerk
and other tasks in relation to credit control and debt   Credit controller                                           3
collection.                                              Credit supervisor


TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 4122 ACCOUNTS AND WAGES
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     CLERKS, BOOK-KEEPERS,                                  4
                                                              OTHER FINANCIAL CLERKS
Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades but is
also possible with other academic qualifications.        Accounts and wages clerks, book-keepers, and other
Professional qualifications are available and may be     financial clerks, maintain and balance records of
required for some posts.                                 financial transactions, calculate hours worked, wages
                                                         due and other relevant contributions/deductions and         5
                                                         perform other financial and related clerical duties.
TASKS

• receives requests for credit submissions and           TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
   lending proposals;                                    ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                     6
• arranges for investigations of the credit              There are no minimum academic requirements,
   worthiness of individuals or companies;               although entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades
                                                         or equivalent qualifications. Training is typically
• deals with any enquiries or difficulties
                                                         provided on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in Administration
   concerning the acceptance or rejection of credit
   applications;
                                                         are available at Levels 1 and 2.                            7
• checks that accounting, recording and statutory
   procedures are adhered to for all credit              TASKS
   transactions;
                                                         • checks and records accuracy of daily records of
• arranges for the collection of arrears of payment.          financial transactions;                                8


                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   159
                • prepares provisional balances and reconciles                • receives and pays out cash, cheques, money
Major Group 4



                   these with appropriate accounts;                              orders, credit notes, foreign currency or travellers
                                                                                 cheques;
                • calculates and records hours worked, wages due,
                   deductions and voluntary contributions;                    • provides postal services, pays pensions, Job
                                                                                 Seekers' Allowance and other state benefits to
                • compiles schedules and distributes or arranges                 claimants, supplies official forms and
                   distribution of wages and salaries;                           documentation to the public, and performs other
                                                                                 tasks specific to the activities of a post office.
                • calculates costs and overheads and prepares
                   analyses for management.

                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
  1             RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              Bank clerk
                                                                              Box office clerk
                Accounts assistant
                                                                              Cashier (bank, building society)
                Accounts clerk
                                                                              Cashier (bookmakers, turf accountants)
                Audit assistant
                                                                              Clerk (bank, building society)
                Bookkeeper
  2             Cost clerk
                                                                              Post office clerk
                                                                              Ticket seller
                Ledger clerk
                Wages clerk


  3             4123 COUNTER CLERKS
                Counter clerks deal with the payment of money,
                cheques and other financial claims and open and
                close accounts. Advise upon financial products and
                services offered by banks, building societies and post
  4             offices.



                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  5
                There are no minimum academic requirements,
                although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, A
                levels/H grades or an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level
                III. On-the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in
                Providing Financial Services (Banks and Building
  6             Societies) are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.



                TASKS

  7             • deals with enquiries from customers, other banks
                   and other authorised enquirers;

                • maintains records of transactions and compiles
                   information;

  8             • advises customers on financial services and
                   products available;




  9

                160      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                 Major Group 4
                         MINOR GROUP 413
               ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: RECORDS
Workers in this minor group create, maintain, update and file correspondence, data,
documents and information held electronically for storage and despatch.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       4131   FILING AND OTHER RECORDS ASSISTANTS/CLERKS
       4132   PENSIONS AND INSURANCE CLERKS
       4133   STOCK CONTROL CLERKS                                                                                1
       4134   TRANSPORT AND DISTRIBUTION CLERKS
       4135   LIBRARY ASSISTANTS/CLERKS
       4136   DATABASE ASSISTANTS/CLERKS
       4137   MARKET RESEARCH INTERVIEWERS                                                                        2

4131 FILING AND OTHER                                 RELATED JOB TITLES
     RECORDS ASSISTANTS/
     CLERKS
                                                      Filing clerk                                                3
                                                      Lottery assistant
Filing and other records assistants and clerks        Records clerk
maintain and update documents, correspondence and     Technical clerk
other records and organises their storage.

                                                      4132 PENSIONS AND INSURANCE                                 4
                                                           CLERKS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                             Pensions and insurance clerks provide general
                                                      clerical support to senior colleagues and perform
There are no minimum academic requirements,           specialist clerical tasks in relation to the
although entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades    administration of pension and insurance policies.
                                                                                                                  5
or equivalent qualifications. Training is typically
provided on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in Administration
at Levels 1 and 2 are available.                      TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                      ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                  6
                                                      There are no minimum academic requirements,
TASKS                                                 although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.
                                                      Training is usually provided on-the-job. NVQs/
• examines and sorts incoming material;               SVQs in Insurance are available at Levels 2 and 3.
                                                      Professional qualifications are also available.
• classifies, files, archives and locates documents
   and other records;                                                                                             7
• copies or duplicates documents or other records;    TASKS

• performs specialised clerical tasks in connection   • answers queries from clients and assists in
   with conveyancing, litigation and the                   interpreting and completing information
   maintenance of medical records.                         requested on forms;                                    8


                                                                                                                  9

                                                      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   161
                • checks forms completed by clients and contacts                 • receives enquiries and orders from customers,
Major Group 4



                   clients to obtain additional information or to                   and quotes prices, discounts, delivery dates and
                   clarify details;                                                 other relevant information;

                • makes arrangements for financial advisers to visit             • prepares requisitions, consignments and other
                   clients and potential customers;                                 despatch documents;

                • transfers information from application forms and               • checks requisitions against stock records and
                   other documentation to computerised records;                     forwards to issuing department;

                • receives notice of changes to personal                         • adjusts stock records as orders are received,
                   circumstances and updates files;                                 reports on damaged stock and prepares
                                                                                    requisitions to replenish damaged stock.
                • issues application forms, policy documents,
  1                reminders, claims forms and other standard
                   documentation;
                                                                                 RELATED JOB TITLES
                • performs general clerical duties to support senior
                   staff.                                                        Material controller
                                                                                 Progress chaser
  2                                                                              Stock control clerk
                                                                                 Stock controller
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Claims handler
                Insurance clerk                                                  4134 TRANSPORT AND
  3             Pensions administrator                                                DISTRIBUTION CLERKS
                                                                                 Workers in this unit group perform various clerical
                                                                                 functions related to the transport and distribution of
                4133 STOCK CONTROL CLERKS                                        goods and freight.
  4             Stock control clerks receive orders from customers,
                prepare requisitions or despatch documents for
                ordered goods, maintain and update records, files                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                and other correspondence regarding in relation to                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                the storage and despatch of goods.
                                                                                 There are no minimum academic requirements,
  5                                                                              although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.
                                                                                 Training is usually provided on-the-job. NVQs/
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                         SVQs considering various aspects of road
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                        distribution and cargo operations are available at
                                                                                 Levels 1, 2 and 3.
                There are no minimum academic requirements,
  6             although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.
                Training is usually provided on-the-job. NVQs/
                SVQs are available at Levels 2 and 3.                            TASKS

                                                                                 • processes customer orders and forwards
                                                                                    requisition documentation to storage and
  7             TASKS                                                               distribution personnel;

                • receives and checks in deliveries from suppliers               • formulates delivery loads, vehicle schedules and
                   or completed stock to be despatched to                           routes to be followed by delivery staff;
                   customers;
                                                                                 • monitors tachograph readings and maintains
  8             • allocates appropriate storage space in accordance                 records of hours worked and distance travelled
                   with stock control and space utilisation policies;               by drivers;




  9

                162         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• obtains customs clearance and processes import




                                                                                                                   Major Group 4
                                                        4136 DATABASE ASSISTANTS/
   and export documentation necessary for the                CLERKS
   movement of goods between countries;
                                                        Database assistants and clerks create, maintain,
• maintains records regarding the movement and          preserve and update information held in electronic
   location of freight, containers and staff.           databases, computer files, voice-mailboxes and e-
                                                        mail systems.

RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
Distribution co-ordinator                               ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Fleet administrator
Fleet controller
Shipping clerk
                                                        There are no minimum academic requirements,                 1
                                                        although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.
Transport clerk                                         Training is usually provided on-the-job.



4135 LIBRARY ASSISTANTS/                                TASKS
                                                                                                                    2
     CLERKS
                                                        • receives, checks, prioritises and assembles
Library assistants and clerks classify, sort and file        information for inputting;
publications, documents, audio-visual and
                                                        • operates keyboard to edit, update and create files,
computerised material in libraries and offices.
                                                             to enter data and to retrieve data or produce
                                                             output;
                                                                                                                    3
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                • checks accuracy through validation of
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                    information inputted and monitoring the
                                                             consistency of any output;
There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.       • reports failures to systems programmers and               4
Training is usually provided on-the-job. NVQs/               engineers;
SVQs in Information and Library Services are            • enters database to search for information and
available at Levels 2 and 3.                                 answer enquiries;

                                                        • performs general clerical duties including                5
TASKS                                                        maintaining records and completing worksheets.

• sorts, catalogues and maintains library records;
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES
• locates and retrieves material on request for
   borrowers;                                           Computer clerk
                                                                                                                    6
                                                        Data entry clerk
• issues library material and records date of issue/    Data processor
   due date for return;
                                                        VDU operator
• classifies, labels and indexes new books;
                                                                                                                    7
• performs simple repairs on old books.                 4137 MARKET RESEARCH
                                                             INTERVIEWERS
RELATED JOB TITLES                                      Market research interviewers conduct interviews to

Library assistant
                                                        collect information on the opinions and preferences
                                                        of consumers, businesses, the electorate and other
                                                                                                                    8
Library clerk                                           selected groups.



                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   163
Major Group 4


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
                SVQs in Market Research (Interviewing) are
                available at Level 2.



                TASKS

                • approaches members of the public, individuals,
  1                households and organisations to arrange and
                   conduct face to face interviews, telephone
                   interviews, focus groups, panel interviews etc.;

                • records progress of interviews by noting answers,
                   completing questionnaires, making audio or
  2                visual recordings or inputting responses into a
                   computer;

                • collects questionnaires, diaries, and other
                   research materials left with interviewees and
                   conducts follow-up interviews;
  3             • collates and reviews information collected and
                   writes reports.



                RELATED JOB TITLES
  4
                Market research interviewer
                Market researcher (interviewing)
                Telephone interviewer

  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                164      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 4
                    MINOR GROUP 414
      ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: COMMUNICATIONS
Workers in this minor group operate switchboards, receive and direct telephone calls, provide
advice and assistance in making telephone calls and operate other telecommunications
equipment.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       4141 TELEPHONISTS
       4142 COMMUNICATION OPERATORS                                                                                 1

4141 TELEPHONISTS                                       4142 COMMUNICATION
                                                             OPERATORS
Telephonists receive and direct callers in
commercial, industrial and other establishments, and    Workers in this unit group operate
                                                                                                                    2
operate telephone (public) and office (private)
                                                        telecommunications equipment to transmit and
switchboards to advise on, and assist with, making
                                                        receive signals and messages.
telephone calls and to relay incoming, outgoing and
internal calls.

                                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                                                                    3
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                        Academic qualifications may not be required. On-
Academic qualifications may not be required. On-        the-job training is provided.
the-job training is provided.                                                                                       4
                                                        TASKS
TASKS
                                                        • receives messages, weather reports and other
• receives callers and directs them to appropriate           material to transmit;
   person or department;                                                                                            5
                                                        • tunes transmitter to required channel or
• operates switchboard to connect outgoing calls             wavelength and relays or receives message to/
   or to relay incoming or internal calls;                   from person or vehicle;
• reports any faults on telephone operating system;     • uses a teleprinter or telex keyboard to transmit
• gives advice on dialling and other special features        messages to other teleprinters or telexes;             6
   available;                                           • keeps record of messages sent and received;
• provides directory information, dialling codes        • performs routine tests and maintenance on
   and details of charges;                                   equipment and reports faults.
• alerts emergency services in cases of fire, crime                                                                 7
   or accident.
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES

RELATED JOB TITLES                                      Communications operator
                                                        Control room operator (emergency services)
Switchboard operator (telephone)                        Radio operator                                              8
Telephone operator                                      Telecommunications officer
Telephonist                                             Telex operator


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   165
Major Group 4



                                         MINOR GROUP 415
                               ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: GENERAL
                Workers in this minor group perform a variety of clerical tasks and comprise people described
                as 'clerk', 'clerical assistant' or with other job titles lacking specific details.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit group:

                       4150 GENERAL OFFICE ASSISTANTS/CLERKS

  1             4150 GENERAL OFFICE
                     ASSISTANTS/CLERKS
                Workers in this unit group are responsible for
                recording, filing and disseminating information for
  2             a business, organisation or individual.



                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  3             There are no minimum academic requirements,
                although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.
                Training is usually provided on-the-job. NVQs/
                SVQs in Administration are available at Levels 2
                and 3.
  4
                TASKS

                • stores information by filling in forms, writing
  5                notes and filing records;

                • types reports, memos, notes, minutes and other
                   documents;

                • receives and distributes incoming and outgoing
  6                correspondence;

                • checks figures, prepares invoices and records
                   details of financial transactions made.



  7             RELATED JOB TITLES

                Clerical assistant
                Clerical officer
                Clerk
                Clerk-typist
  8             Office supervisor




  9

                166      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 4
                  SUB-MAJOR GROUP 42
          SECRETARIAL AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
Secretarial occupations perform general secretarial, clerical and organisational duties in
support of management and other workers.


                         MINOR GROUP 421
               SECRETARIAL AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group provide shorthand and audio dictation services, type, edit and
print documents using typewriters, word processors or personal computers, perform general
                                                                                                                     1
clerical and organisational duties in support of management or other workers, and receive
and direct clients and visitors to commercial, government and other establishments.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
                                                                                                                     2
       4211    MEDICAL SECRETARIES
       4212    LEGAL SECRETARIES
       4213    SCHOOL SECRETARIES
       4214    COMPANY SECRETARIES
                                                                                                                     3
       4215    PERSONAL ASSISTANTS AND OTHER SECRETARIES
       4216    RECEPTIONISTS
       4217    TYPISTS
                                                                                                                     4

4211 MEDICAL SECRETARIES                                 TASKS

Medical secretaries file and maintain medical and        • sorts and files correspondence;                           5
other records, transcribe notes and dictation into       • writes down dictated matter in shorthand and
typewritten form and perform other routine clerical           transcribes it into typewritten form;
tasks in hospitals/surgeries and other medical
establishments.
                                                         • transcribes audio dictation into typewritten form;
                                                         • maintain patients' records and arranges                   6
                                                              appointments;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 • answers enquiries and refers patient to
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     appropriate experts;
                                                         • organises and attends meetings and keeps records
Entrants require GCSEs/S grades or an Intermediate            of proceedings.                                        7
GNVQ/GSVQ Level II. To qualify as a medical
secretary, entrants take a one-year full-time or two-
year part-time diploma in medical secretarial studies.   RELATED JOB TITLES
NVQs/SVQs in Administration are available at             Doctor's secretary
Levels 2, 3 and 4.                                       Medical secretary                                           8


                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   167
Major Group 4



                4212 LEGAL SECRETARIES                                        typically require GCSEs/S grades. NVQs/SVQs in
                                                                              Administration are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.
                Legal secretaries file and maintain legal and other
                records, transcribe notes and dictation into
                typewritten form and perform other routine clerical
                tasks in legal practices.                                     TASKS

                                                                              • sorts and files correspondence;
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      • writes down dictated matter into shorthand and
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                        transcribes it into typewritten form;

                There are no formal academic requirements,                    • transcribes audio dictation into typewritten form;
                although employers may expect candidate to possess
  1             a legal secretarial qualification. Entrants to                • maintains administrative files and records of
                professional legal courses typically require GCSEs/              attendance;
                S grades or equivalent qualifications. NVQs/SVQs
                in Administration are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.         • handles enquiries from parents and arranges
                                                                                 meetings with members of staff.

  2             TASKS
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                • sorts and files correspondence;
                                                                              School clerk
                • writes down dictated matter into shorthand and              School secretary
                   transcribes it into typewritten form;
  3
                • transcribes audio dictation into typewritten form;
                                                                              4214 COMPANY SECRETARIES
                • maintains court and clients' records and arranges
                   appointments;                                              Company secretaries (excluding qualified chartered
                                                                              secretaries) file and maintain company records,
  4             • answers enquiries and directs clients to                    translate notes and dictation into typewritten form
                   appropriate experts;                                       and perform other routine clerical tasks within
                                                                              commercial organisations.
                • attends meetings and keeps records of
                   proceedings.
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  5                                                                           ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              There are no minimum academic requirements,
                Legal secretary                                               although entrants to professional secretarial courses
                Litigation secretary                                          typically require GCSEs/S grades. NVQs/SVQs in
                                                                              Administration are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.
  6
                4213 SCHOOL SECRETARIES
                                                                              TASKS
                School secretaries file and maintain school and other
                records, translate notes and dictation into                   • sorts, distributes and files correspondence;
  7             typewritten form and perform other routine clerical
                                                                              • writes down dictated matter into shorthand and
                tasks within schools.
                                                                                 transcribes it into typewritten form;

                                                                              • transcribes audio dictation into typewritten form;
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATE QUALIFICATIONS                                      • arranges meetings, circulates agenda and keeps
  8                                                                              records of proceedings;
                There are no minimum academic requirements,
                although entrants to professional secretarial courses         • directs enquiries to appropriate members of staff.


  9

                168      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 4
RELATED JOB TITLES                                      4216 RECEPTIONISTS
Club secretary                                          Receptionists receive and direct telephone calls and
Company secretary                                       visitors to commercial, government and other
                                                        establishments.

4215 PERSONAL ASSISTANTS AND
     OTHER SECRETARIES                                  TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                        ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
secretarial tasks for individuals or within             There are no formal academic entry requirements,
organisations not elsewhere classified in MINOR         although many employers expect entrants to possess
GROUP 421: Secretarial and Related Occupations.         GCSEs/S grades. There are a variety of relevant             1
                                                        vocational qualifications available. NVQs/SVQs in
                                                        Administration are available at Level 2 and
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                encompass various aspects of reception work.
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                               Professional qualifications are also available.
There are no minimum academic requirements,
                                                                                                                    2
although entry to professional secretarial courses
typically requires GCSEs/S grades. NVQs/SVQs            TASKS
are available in Administration at Levels 2, 3 and 4.
                                                        • receives callers and clients and directs them to
                                                             the appropriate person or department;                  3
TASKS                                                   • records the details of enquiries and makes
                                                             appointments and reservations;
• acts as a first point of contact for a manager with
   colleagues and           people   from   outside     • deals with telephone enquiries;
   organisations;
                                                        • supplies brochures, pamphlets and other                   4
• arranges appointments, organises travel                    information for clients;
   arrangements and makes reservations;
                                                        • records details of visitors, issues security passes
• maintains, sorts and files correspondence and              and informs visitors of any actions to be taken in
   other documentation;                                      case of an emergency.
• writes down dictated matter in shorthand and
                                                                                                                    5
   transcribes it into typewritten form;

• attends meetings and keeps records of                 RELATED JOB TITLES
   proceedings;
                                                        Doctor's receptionist
• translates documents and liaises with overseas        Receptionist                                                6
   clients and suppliers.                               Secretary-receptionist


RELATED JOB TITLES

Bilingual secretary
                                                        4217 TYPISTS                                                7
Farm secretary                                          Workers in this unit group type letters, minutes,
Manager's personal assistant                            memos, reports and other documents from written
Personal managerial assistant                           or dictated matter, using typewriters, word
Secretary                                               processors or personal computers.
                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   169
Major Group 4


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades.
                Entrants are normally expected to have obtained
                minimum typing speeds and hold professional
                certificates. Units in keyboarding skills and
                producing documents are included in NVQs/SVQs
                in Administration at Levels 1 to 4.



                TASKS
  1
                • types letters, minutes, memos, reports and other
                   documents;

                • proof reads, edits and corrects errors to produce
                   clean copy to specified layout;
  2             • adjusts settings of printer as necessary and
                   monitors quality of printed document.



                RELATED JOB TITLES
  3
                Audio typist
                Shorthand typist
                Typist
                Word processor operator
  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                170      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                         Major Group 5
                       MAJOR GROUP 5
                 SKILLED TRADES OCCUPATIONS
This major group covers occupations whose tasks involve the performance of complex
physical duties that normally require a degree of initiative, manual dexterity and other
practical skills. The main tasks of these occupations require experience with, and
understanding of, the work situation, the materials worked with and the requirements of
the structures, machinery and other items produced.


Most occupations in this major group have a level of skill commensurate with a substantial                1
period of training, often provided by means of work-based training programme.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:
                                                                                                          2
51 SKILLED AGRICULTURAL TRADES
    511   AGRICULTURAL TRADES

52 SKILLED METAL AND ELECTRICAL TRADES                                                                    3
    521   METAL FORMING, WELDING AND RELATED TRADES
    522   METAL MACHINING, FITTING AND INSTRUMENT MAKING
          TRADES
    523   VEHICLE TRADES                                                                                  4
    524   ELECTRICAL TRADES

53 SKILLED CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING TRADES
    531   CONSTRUCTION TRADES
                                                                                                          5
    532   BUILDING TRADES

54 TEXTILES, PRINTING AND OTHER SKILLED TRADES
                                                                                                          6
    541   TEXTILES AND GARMENTS TRADES
    542   PRINTING TRADES
    543   FOOD PREPARATION TRADES
    549   SKILLED TRADES NEC
                                                                                                          7


                                                                                                          8


                                                                                                          9

                                              Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   171
Major Group 5



                                          SUB-MAJOR GROUP 51
                                     SKILLED AGRICULTURAL TRADES
                Skilled agricultural trades cultivate crops, raise animals and catch fish for consumption,
                grow plants and trees for sale, tend gardens, parks, sports pitches and other recreational
                areas, and maintain areas of forestry.


                                                     MINOR GROUP 511
                                                   AGRICULTURAL TRADES
  1             Workers within agricultural trades cultivate crops and raise animals for consumption, grow
                plants, trees, shrubs and flowers for sale, tend private and public gardens, parks, sports
                pitches and other recreational areas, and perform a variety of other skilled occupations
                related to agriculture and fishing.
  2             Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       5111    FARMERS
                       5112    HORTICULTURAL TRADES
  3                    5113    GARDENERS AND GROUNDSMEN/GROUNDSWOMEN
                       5119    AGRICULTURAL AND FISHING TRADES NEC


  4             5111 FARMERS                                                  • operates and maintains farm machinery such as
                                                                                 combine harvesters, straw balers, milking
                Farmers and related occupations cultivate arable                 machines and tractors;
                crops, fruits and trees, and raise cattle, sheep, pigs,
                poultry and other livestock for consumption.                  • arranges for the sale of crops, livestock and other
                                                                                 farm produce;
  5                                                                           • maintains records of production, finance and
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                        breeding.

                No formal academic qualifications are required.
                Training is typically received on-the-job. A variety
  6             of vocational qualifications in agriculture are               RELATED JOB TITLES
                available, including NVQs/SVQs at Levels 1 to 4.
                                                                              Agricultural contractor
                                                                              Farmer
                                                                              Herd manager
                TASKS
                                                                              Small holder
  7             • feeds and waters animals, supervises births, treats
                   minor ailments and calls vet if necessary;
                                                                              5112 HORTICULTURAL TRADES
                • plants, propagates, sprays, fertilises and harvests
                   field crops and horticultural produce;
                                                                              Horticultural trades workers intensively cultivate
  8             • undertakes farm maintenance tasks such as                   vegetables, plants, fruit, shrubs, trees and flowers
                   fencing, hedging, cleaning and building                    in greenhouses, market gardens, nurseries and
                   maintenance;                                               orchards.



  9

                172      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 TASKS
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                         • levels ground and installs drainage system as
There are no formal academic entry requirements.              required;
NVQs/SVQs in Horticulture are available at Levels
1, 2 and 3. Professional qualifications from the         • prepares soil and plants and transplants, prunes,
Royal Horticultural Society are also available.               weeds and otherwise tends plant life;

                                                         • protects plants from pests and diseases;
TASKS                                                    • cuts and lays turf using hand and machine tools
                                                              and repairs damaged turf;
• prepares soil in field, bed or pot by hand or
                                                         • moves soil to alter surface contour of land using
   machine;
                                                              mechanical equipment and constructs paths,
                                                                                                                     1
• mixes soil, composts, fertilisers and/or organic            rockeries, ponds and other features;
   matter and spreads fertiliser and manure;
                                                         • rolls, mows and waters grass.
• sows seeds and bulbs and transplants seedlings;
• propagates plants by taking cuttings and by            RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                     2
   grafting and budding, applies weed-killer,
   fungicide and insecticide to control pests and        Gardener
   diseases;                                             Greenkeeper
                                                         Groundsman/groundswoman
• prunes and thins trees and shrubs;                     Landscape gardener                                          3
• supports trees by staking and wiring.                  Turf cutter



RELATED JOB TITLES                                       5119 AGRICULTURAL AND
                                                              FISHING TRADES NEC                                     4
Horticulturist (market gardening)
Market gardener                                          Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
Nurseryman                                               agricultural and fishing occupations not elsewhere
Propagator                                               classified in MINOR GROUP 511: Agricultural
                                                         Trades.
                                                                                                                     5
5113 GARDENERS AND                                       TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
     GROUNDSMEN/                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
     GROUNDSWOMEN
                                                         No formal academic qualifications are required.
Gardeners and groundsmen/groundswomen cultivate          Training is typically received on-the-job. A variety
                                                                                                                     6
flowers, trees, shrubs and other plants in public and    of vocational and academic qualifications in fish
private gardens, construct artificial features to        farming, forestry, horse and other animal care are
improve the appearance of existing terrain, cut and      available. Professional qualifications are also
lay turf and maintain areas for sports and recreation.   available and may be mandatory in some areas.
                                                                                                                     7
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 TASKS
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                         • nets river fish and feeds and maintains them in
There are no formal academic entry requirements.              spawning pens, cultivates and harvests oysters,
NVQs/SVQs in Horticulture are available at Levels             mussels and clams on natural and artificial beds,      8
1, 2 and 3, and in Sports Turf Management at Level            treats water and diseased fish, and empties and
4. Professional qualifications are also available.            cleans outdoor tanks;


                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   173
                • commands, navigates and maintains shipping
Major Group 5



                   vessels, assists with the shooting, hauling and
                   repairing of nets, prepares, lays and empties
                   baited pots, and guts, sorts and stows fish;

                • establishes and maintains forest nurseries,
                   forestry and woodland, and diagnoses and treats
                   diseased trees;

                • houses, feeds, exercises, trains and grooms
                   horses and dogs in preparation for entry to shows
                   and races;

  1             • monitors and maintains the level of wildfowl on
                   public and private estates.



                RELATED JOB TITLES
  2             Fisherman
                Gamekeeper
                Greyhound trainer
                Stable manager
                Tree surgeon
  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                174     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                     Major Group 5
                   SUB-MAJOR GROUP 52
          SKILLED METAL AND ELECTRICAL TRADES
Workers in this sub-major group shape and join metal, erect and maintain metal structures
and fixtures, set up and operate metal working machinery, install and repair industrial
plant and machinery, assemble parts in the manufacture of metal goods, make and calibrate
precision instruments, maintain and repair motor vehicles, and install, test and repair
industrial, domestic and commercial electrical/electronic equipment.


                     MINOR GROUP 521                                                                                  1
        METAL FORMING, WELDING AND RELATED TRADES
Metal forming, welding and related trades workers shape, cast, finish and join metal, and
erect, install, maintain and repair metal structures and fixtures.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
                                                                                                                      2

       5211    SMITHS AND FORGE WORKERS
       5212    MOULDERS, CORE MAKERS, DIE CASTERS
       5213    SHEET METAL WORKERS                                                                                    3
       5214    METAL PLATE WORKERS, SHIPWRIGHTS, RIVETERS
       5215    WELDING TRADES
       5216    PIPE FITTERS
                                                                                                                      4

5211 SMITHS AND FORGE                                     TASKS
     WORKERS
                                                          • heats or supervises the heating of metal to be            5
Smiths and forge workers operate or direct the                 forged in furnace;
operation of power hammers and presses to shape
                                                          • positions or directs the positioning of heated
heated metal to requirements and to make and repair
                                                               metal on anvil or other work surface;
a variety of metal articles by heating, hammering
and bending.                                              • operates or directs operation of press or hammer          6
                                                               and repositions workpiece between strokes;

                                                          • holds special forging tools against workpiece to
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                       shape and cut metal as required;
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                          • bends or shapes metal by hand forging methods             7
There are no formal academic entry requirements.               using hammers, punches, drifts and other hand
Training is usually via apprenticeships administered           tools;
by professional associations and last up to four years.   • tempers and hardens forged pieces, as required,
Apprenticeships incorporate technical training and             by quenching in oil or water;
practical experience and lead to recognised awards
and membership of professional bodies.                    • fits and secures horses shoes.                            8


                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   175
Major Group 5


                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            5213 SHEET METAL WORKERS
                Blacksmith                                                    Sheet metal workers mark out, cut, shape and join
                Farrier                                                       sheet metal using hand or machine tools, to make
                Forger                                                        and repair sheet metal products and components
                Hot brass stamper                                             (excluding vehicle bodywork).
                Smith

                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                5212 MOULDERS, CORE MAKERS,                                   ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                     DIE CASTERS
                                                                              Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades.
  1             Moulders, core makers and die casters make sand,
                loam and plaster moulds and cores for casting metal
                                                                              Training is usually via apprenticeship including
                                                                              practical experience and technical training. Modern
                and pour or inject molten metal into dies by hand or          Apprenticeships in Engineering Materials
                machine.                                                      Processing, Engineering Assembly and Engineering
                                                                              Construction are available at NVQ/SVQ Level 3.

  2             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     TASKS
                Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades or have             • examines drawings and specifications to assess
                relevant practical experience. Training is by
                                                                                 job requirements;
                apprenticeship including practical experience and
  3             technical training. Modern Apprenticeships in
                Engineering Material Processing at NVQ/SVQ Level
                                                                              • uses template, measuring instruments and tools
                                                                                 to mark out layout lines and reference points;
                3 are available.
                                                                              • uses hand or machine tools to bend, roll, fold,
                                                                                 press or beat cut sheet metal;
                TASKS
  4                                                                           • assembles prepared parts and joins them by
                • positions moulding frame over pattern, fills it                bolting, welding or soldering;
                   with sand, loam, or plaster and compacts by hand
                   or machine;
                                                                              • finishes product by grinding, filing, cleaning and
                                                                                 polishing;
                • transfers mould unit to oven for baking or hardens
  5                by injecting carbon dioxide;                               • repairs damaged metal parts such as copper
                                                                                 sheets and tubes by beating, riveting, soldering,
                • separates mould from pattern and repairs                       welding and fitting replacement parts.
                   damaged mould surfaces;
                • applies refractory bonding solution to moulds and
                   dies to prevent molten metal fusing with sand;             RELATED JOB TITLES
  6
                • fits cores in mould to form hollow parts in                 Coppersmith
                   casting;                                                   Metal finisher
                                                                              Panel beater (metal trades)
                • prepares casting pit with vents to allow the escape         Sheet metal fabricator
                   of gases, scoops molten metal from furnace using           Sheet metal worker
  7                ladle and pours it into die or die casting machine.


                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            5214 METAL PLATE WORKERS,
                                                                                   SHIPWRIGHTS, RIVETERS
                Coremaker (metal trades)
  8             Die caster                                                    Metal plate workers, shipwrights and riveters mark
                Floor moulder                                                 off, drill, shape, position, rivet and seal metal plates
                Moulder and coremaker (foundry)                               and girders to form structures and frameworks.



  9

                176      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 and technical training. NVQs/SVQs are available
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                at Levels 1, 2 and 3. Modern Apprenticeships are
                                                         available at NVQ/SVQ Level 3. To gain
Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades. Training      employment, welders must pass a Welder Approval
is usually via apprenticeship including practical        Test to demonstrate the required skills.
experience and technical training. Modern
Apprenticeships in Engineering Materials
Processing, Engineering Assembly and Engineering
Construction are available at NVQ/SVQ Level 3.           TASKS

                                                         • selects appropriate welding equipment such as
TASKS                                                         electric arc, gas torch, etc.;

• examines drawings and specifications and uses
                                                         • connects wires to power supply, or hoses to
                                                              oxygen, acetylene, argon, carbon dioxide, electric
                                                                                                                     1
   rules, scribes and punches to mark out metal plate
                                                              arc, or other source and adjusts controls to
   with guidelines and reference points;
                                                              regulate gas pressure and rate of flow;
• cuts metal plate to markings using hand or
   machine tools;
                                                         • guides electrode or torch along line of weld,
                                                              burns away damaged areas, and melts brazing            2
• uses machine tools to bend, curve, punch, drill             alloy or solder into joints;
   and straighten metal plate as required;
                                                         • cleans and smoothes weld.
• uses hydraulic jacks to position and align metal
   platework or frame for welding and bolting;
• selects suitable rivets and rivets together metal      RELATED JOB TITLES                                          3
   plates and girders;
                                                         Arc welder
• seals seams with caulking compound, smoothes           Electric welder
   welds, fixes metal doors, metal collars, portholes,   Fitter-welder
   tank and hatch covers and performs other metal        Solderer (metal trades)
   plate finishing tasks using a variety of hand and     Spot welder                                                 4
   power tools.                                          Welder


RELATED JOB TITLES                                       5216 PIPE FITTERS
Boilermaker                                              Workers in this unit group install and repair pipes in
                                                                                                                     5
Caulker-burner                                           industrial and domestic premises.
Plater-welder
Shipwright
                                                         TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                   6
5215 WELDING TRADES
                                                         There are no formal academic entry requirements,
Welding trades workers join metal parts by welding,      some employers may expect entrants to possess
brazing and soldering, and cut and remove defects from   GCSEs/S grades. Training is usually via
metal using a variety of equipment and techniques.       apprenticeship including practical experience and
                                                         technical training. NVQs/SVQs in Mechanical
                                                                                                                     7
                                                         Engineering Services (Plumbing) at Levels 2 and 3.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                         TASKS
Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades or an                                                                      8
appropriate GNVQ/GSVQ. Training is typically by          • examines drawings and specifications to
apprenticeship incorporating practical experience             determine layout of piping;



                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   177
                • measures and cuts required lengths of copper,
Major Group 5



                   lead, steel, iron, aluminium or plastic piping
                   using hand or machine tools;

                • installs pipes for heating, ventilating, fire
                   prevention, water and similar systems in
                   domestic, commercial and industrial properties;

                • fits piping into position and joins sections by
                   welding, soldering, cementing, fusing, screwing
                   or by other methods;

                • tests pipe work for leaks and makes necessary
  1                adjustments.



                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Advanced pipe fitter
  2             Pipe fitter




  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                178     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 5
                       MINOR GROUP 522
            METAL MACHINING, FITTING AND INSTRUMENT
                        MAKING TRADES
Metal machining, fitting and instrument making trades workers mark out metal for machine
tool working, set up and operate lathes, boring, drilling, grinding, milling machines and
presses, assemble and repair machine tools, install and repair plant and industrial machinery,
fit and assemble parts and sub-assemblies in the manufacture of metal products and make,
calibrate, test and repair precision and optical instruments.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
                                                                                                                     1
       5221 METAL MACHINING SETTERS AND SETTER-OPERATORS
       5222 TOOL MAKERS, TOOL FITTERS AND MARKERS-OUT
       5223 METAL WORKING PRODUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
            FITTERS                                                                                                  2
       5224 PRECISION INSTRUMENT MAKERS AND REPAIRERS


                                                                                                                     3
5221 METAL MACHINING                                     • operates automatic or manual controls to feed
     SETTERS AND SETTER                                       tool to workpiece or vice versa and checks
                                                              accuracy of machining;
     OPERATORS
                                                         • repositions workpiece, changes tools and resets
Workers in this unit group operate machines to drill,
bore, grind, cut, and mill or to otherwise shape metal        machine as necessary during production run;            4
workpieces.
                                                         • instructs operators on the safe and correct method
                                                              of operation of the machine.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                                                                            5
                                                         RELATED JOB TITLES
There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.               Centre lathe turner
Training is usually received on-the-job. NVQs/           Machine setter (metal trades)
SVQs at Level 2 are available.
                                                         Machine tool setter
                                                         Setter (metal trades)
                                                                                                                     6
                                                         Setter-operator (metal trades)
TASKS
                                                         Tool setter-operator
• examines drawings and specifications to
   determine appropriate method, sequence of
   operations and machine setting;                                                                                   7
                                                         5222 TOOL MAKERS, TOOL
• selects and fixes work-holding devices and                  FITTERS AND MARKERS-OUT
   appropriate cutting, shaping, grinding and/or
   forming tools;                                        Tool makers, tool fitters and markers-out mark out
• sets machine controls for rotation speeds, depth       metal for machining and fit, assemble and repair
                                                         machine and press tools, dies, jigs, fixtures and other
                                                                                                                     8
   of cut and stroke, and adjusts machine table,
   stops and guides;                                     tools.



                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   179
Major Group 5


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      NVQ/SVQ Level 3 are available. NVQs/SVQs in
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     Aircraft Engineering Maintenance are available at
                                                                              Level 3. Further professional qualifications are
                There are no formal academic requirements although            required to become a licensed aircraft engineer.
                some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
                Training is usually received on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs
                at Level 2 are available.
                                                                              TASKS

                                                                              • examines drawings and specifications to
                TASKS
                                                                                 determine appropriate methods and sequence of
                                                                                 operations;
                • examines drawings and specifications to
                   determine appropriate method and sequence of
  1                operations;
                                                                              • fits and assembles parts and/or metal sub-
                                                                                 assemblies to fine tolerances to make aircraft and
                • marks out reference points using measuring                     marine engines, prototype metal products,
                   instruments and tools such as punches, rules and              agricultural machinery and machine tools;
                   squares;                                                   • fits and assembles, other than to fine tolerances,
  2             • operates hand and machine tools to shape                       prepared parts and sub-assemblies to make motor
                                                                                 vehicles, printing and agricultural machinery,
                   workpieces to specifications and checks accuracy
                   of machining;                                                 orthopaedic appliances and other metal goods;

                • assembles prepared parts, checks their alignment            • examines operation of, and makes adjustments
                   with micrometers, optical projectors and other                to, internal combustion and jet engines and motor
  3                measuring equipment and adjusts as necessary;                 vehicles;

                • repairs damaged or worn tools.                              • erects, installs, repairs and services plant and
                                                                                 industrial machinery, including railway stock,
                                                                                 textile machines, aircraft frames and engines,
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                               coin operated machines, locks, sewing machines,
  4                                                                              bicycles and gas and oil appliances.
                Die sinker (metal trades)
                Jig and tool fitter
                Marker-off (engineering)
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                Tool maker (metal trades)
                Tool room fitter                                              Aircraft engineer
  5                                                                           Aircraft fitter
                                                                              Aircraft ground engineer
                5223 METAL WORKING                                            Bench fitter
                     PRODUCTION AND                                           Engineering fitter
                     MAINTENANCE FITTERS                                      Fitter and turner
  6                                                                           Machine fitter
                Metal working production and maintenance fitters              Maintenance fitter
                erect, install and repair electrical and mechanical           Mechanic-fitter
                plant and industrial machinery, fit and assemble parts        Millwright
                and sub-assemblies in the manufacture of metal                Plant fitter
                products and test and adjust new motor vehicles and
  7             engines.

                                                                              5224 PRECISION INSTRUMENT
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                           MAKERS AND REPAIRERS
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              Precision instrument makers and repairers make,
  8             Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, a GNVQ/              calibrate, test and repair precision and optical
                GSVQ or a BTEC/SQA award. Modern                              instruments such as barometers, compasses, cameras,
                Apprenticeships in Engineering Maintenance at                 calibrators, watches, clocks and chronometers.


  9

                180      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Some GCSEs/S grades qualifications may be
required. Training is usually via an apprenticeship
including work experience and practical and
technical training leading to recognised awards.



TASKS

• examines drawings or specifications to determine
   appropriate methods, materials and sequence of                                                                   1
   operation;

• marks out and machines aluminium, brass, steel
   and plastics using machine tools such as grinders,
   lathes and shapers;

• tests watches and clocks for repair to diagnose
                                                                                                                    2
   faults and removes, repairs or replaces damaged
   and worn parts;

• tests completed timepiece for accuracy using
   electronic or other test equipment;                                                                              3
• carries out service tasks such as cleaning, oiling
   and regulating;

• checks prepared parts for accuracy using
   measuring equipment, assembles parts and
   adjusts as necessary using hand and machine
                                                                                                                    4
   tools;

• positions, aligns and secures optical lenses in
   mounts;

• tests, adjusts and repairs precision and optical                                                                  5
   instruments.



RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                    6
Clockmaker
Horologist
Instrument maker
Instrument mechanic
Optical technician
Precision engineer                                                                                                  7
Watch and clock repairer
Watchmaker


                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   181
Major Group 5



                                                          MINOR GROUP 523
                                                          VEHICLE TRADES
                Vehicle trades workers repair, service and maintain the bodies, engines, parts, sub-
                assemblies, internal trimmings, upholstery and exterior surfaces of vehicles.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       5231    MOTOR MECHANICS, AUTO ENGINEERS
                       5232    VEHICLE BODY BUILDERS AND REPAIRERS
  1                    5233    AUTO ELECTRICIANS
                       5234    VEHICLE SPRAY PAINTERS



  2             5231 MOTOR MECHANICS, AUTO                                    • carries out routine maintenance checks on oil and
                     ENGINEERS                                                   air filters, brakes and other vehicle parts/systems.

                Motor mechanics and auto engineers accept calls
                for help and repair and service the mechanical parts          RELATED JOB TITLES
  3             of cars, lorries, buses, motorcycles and other motor
                vehicles.                                                     Car mechanic
                                                                              Diesel fitter
                                                                              Garage mechanic
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      Motor fitter
                                                                              Motor mechanic
  4             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              Motor vehicle technician
                There are no formal academic entry requirements,              Motorcycle mechanic
                although some employers may require GCSEs/S                   Vehicle mechanic
                grades or an equivalent qualification. Training is            Vehicle patrolman/woman
                undertaken off- and on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs at
  5             Levels 2 and 3 are available.             Modern
                Apprenticeships at NVQ/SVQ Level 3 are available              5232 VEHICLE BODY BUILDERS
                and take three to four years to complete.                          AND REPAIRERS
                                                                              Workers in this unit group construct and repair the
                                                                              bodies of road vehicles, railway coaches and aircraft,
  6             TASKS
                                                                              and fit interior and exterior fittings to vehicle bodies.
                • may drive to site of breakdown and visually
                   checks, test drives or uses test equipment to
                   diagnose engine and mechanical faults;                     TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  7             • removes, dismantles and checks the appropriate
                   parts, systems or entire engine;                           There are no formal academic entry requirements
                                                                              although some employers may require GCSEs/S
                • repairs and replaces defective parts;                       grades or an equivalent qualification. Off- and on-
                • prepares new parts using hand and machine tools;            the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs at Levels
                                                                              2 and 3 are available. Modern Apprenticeships at
  8             • reassembles, tests, adjusts and tunes the                   NVQ/SVQ Level 3 are also available and take
                   appropriate parts, systems or entire engine;               between three to four years to complete.




  9

                182      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 5
TASKS                                                   TASKS

• diagnoses job requirements or ascertains work         • uses portable and bench test equipment to
   specifications from drawings or instructions;             diagnose faults in electrical/electronic circuitry;

• selects, cuts, shapes and assembles materials to      • removes faulty components and fits replacements
   form parts of vehicle underframe, framework and           using hand tools and by simple brazing/
   body;                                                     soldering;
• repairs damage to chassis and engine mountings        • makes new parts using hand and machine tools;
   using hydraulic rams, jacks and jigs;
                                                        • checks condition of electrical/electronic systems
• hammers out dents in bodywork, fills in small              and carries out servicing tasks;
   depressions or corroded areas in solder, plastic
   or other filler compound and replaces body           • installs additional electrical amenities such as
                                                                                                                    1
   panels using hand and power tools;                        radio/cassette players, aerials and radio
                                                             suppressers.
• installs and repairs interior fittings including
   seats, seatbelts and fascia in cars, sinks and
   special features in caravans, mobile shops and
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                    2
   bulkheads in aircraft;

• positions, secures and repairs external fittings      Auto electrician
   including windows, doors, door handles, catches      Automobile electrician
   and roof attachments.
                                                                                                                    3
RELATED JOB TITLES                                      5234 VEHICLE SPRAY PAINTERS

Body builder (vehicles)                                 Vehicle spray painters use spray equipment to apply
Body maker (vehicles)                                   paint, cellulose and other protective or decorative
Coach builder                                           materials to the bodywork of motor vehicles, railway        4
Coach finisher                                          coaches and aircraft.
Panel beater (vehicle repair)
Vehicle body repairer
Vehicle builder                                         TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                        ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                   5
5233 AUTO ELECTRICIANS                                  There are no formal academic entry requirements
                                                        although some employers may require GCSEs/S
Auto electricians repair and service the electrical/    grades or an equivalent qualification. Off- and on-
electronic circuitry and components of cars, lorries,   the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs at Levels
buses, motorcycles and other motor vehicles.            2 and 3 are available. Modern Apprenticeships at            6
                                                        NVQ/SVQ Level 3 are also available and take
                                                        between three to four years to complete.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                        TASKS                                                       7
There are no formal academic entry requirements
although some employers may require GCSEs/S             • applies masking material to protect areas not to
grades or an equivalent qualification. Off- and on-          be coated and removes any external fixtures;
the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs at Levels
2 and 3 are available. Modern Apprenticeships at        • consults vehicle colour code, chooses
NVQ/SVQ Level 3 are also available and take                  appropriate paint or mixes paint to achieve
                                                                                                                    8
between three to four years to complete.                     desired consistency and colour;



                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   183
                • uses hand or electrostatic spray gun to coat
Major Group 5



                   surfaces, adjusting nozzle and pressure valves
                   of the gun as required;

                • removes masking materials and refits external
                   fittings after completion of spraying;

                • cleans and maintains spray equipment, protective
                   clothing and spraying booth.



                RELATED JOB TITLES
  1             Car paint sprayer
                Coach painter
                Vehicle refinisher


  2


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                184      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                     Major Group 5
                                      MINOR GROUP 524
                                     ELECTRICAL TRADES
Workers in electrical trades install wiring in road and rail vehicles and aircraft and assemble,
install, maintain, test and repair electrical and electronic equipment, components and systems
concerned with lighting, signalling, telecommunications, radio and television, computing
and other commercial, industrial and domestic functions.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       5241    ELECTRICIANS, ELECTRICAL FITTERS                                                                       1
       5242    TELECOMMUNICATIONS ENGINEERS
       5243    LINES REPAIRERS AND CABLE JOINTERS
       5244    TV, VIDEO AND AUDIO ENGINEERS
       5245    COMPUTER ENGINEERS, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE                                                       2
       5249    ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS NEC



5241 ELECTRICIANS,                                        • cuts, bends and installs electrical conduit;              3
     ELECTRICAL FITTERS                                   • assembles parts and sub-assemblies using hand
Electricians and electrical fitters assemble parts in          tools and by brazing, riveting or welding;
the manufacture of electrical and electronic
equipment, and install, maintain, and repair electrical   • installs electrical plant, machinery and other
plant, machinery, appliances and wiring.                       electrical fixtures and appliances such as fuse        4
                                                               boxes, generators, light sockets etc.;

                                                          • examines electrical plant or machinery, domestic
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                       appliances and other electrical assembly for
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                      faults using test equipment and replaces worn
                                                               parts and faulty wiring.                               5
Academic qualifications may not be required, though
some GCSEs/S grades or an equivalent qualification
may be an advantage. NVQs/SVQs in Servicing
Electronic Systems are available at Levels 1, 2 and       RELATED JOB TITLES
3. Modern Apprenticeships combining practical
work experience and technical training are available      Electrical contractor                                       6
at Levels 2 and 3. Entrants must have good eyesight       Electrical engineer
and normal colour vision.
                                                          Electrical fitter
                                                          Electrician
                                                          Maintenance electrician
TASKS
                                                                                                                      7
• examines drawings, specifications and wiring
   diagrams to determine the method and sequence
   of operations;
                                                          5242 TELECOMMUNICATIONS
                                                               ENGINEERS
• selects, cuts and lays wires and connects to
   sockets, plugs or terminals by crimping,               Telecommunications engineers install, maintain and          8
   soldering, brazing or bolting;                         repair public and private telephone systems.




                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   185
Major Group 5


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      TASKS
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              • assists with the erection of wood poles or steel
                There are no formal academic requirements,                       towers to carry overhead lines;
                although entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades
                or an equivalent qualification.          Modern               • removes protective sheath from cables, joins
                Apprenticeships and National Traineeships                        conductor wires by brazing, soldering or
                combining work experience and practical training                 crimping and applies conductor insulation and
                are available at NVQ/SVQ Levels 2 and 3.                         protective coverings;

                                                                              • connects and installs transformers, fuse gear,
                TASKS                                                            lightning arrestors, aircraft warning lights, cable
                                                                                 boxes and other equipment;
  1             • installs internal cabling and wiring for telephone
                   systems and fits and wires junction and                    • connects cables to test equipment and tests for
                   distribution boxes;                                           balance, resistance, insulation and any defects;

                • fixes connecting wires from underground and                 • locates and repairs faults to lines and ancillary
                   aerial lines to premises and connects cable                   equipment.
  2                terminals to inside wiring;
                • installs telephones, switchboards and coin
                   operated phone boxes;                                      RELATED JOB TITLES
                • uses testing equipment to locate defective                  Cable jointer
  3                components of circuitry and makes any necessary
                   repairs;
                                                                              Cable repairer (electric)
                                                                              Overhead linesman
                • tests installation and makes any further necessary
                   adjustments.
                                                                              5244 TV, VIDEO AND AUDIO
  4                                                                                ENGINEERS
                RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              TV, video and audio engineers service and repair
                Technical officer (telecommunications)
                                                                              domestic television, video and audio appliances.
                Telecom engineer
                Telecommunications engineer
  5             Telephone engineer
                Telephone installation engineer                               TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                Telephone technician                                          ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                                                                              Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades or an
                                                                              equivalent qualification such as an Intermediate
  6             5243 LINES REPAIRERS AND
                                                                              GNVQ/GSVQ Level II. Training is provided on-
                     CABLE JOINTERS
                                                                              and off-the-job and may be supplemented by short
                Lines repairers and cable jointers install, maintain,         courses delivered by manufacturers. NVQs/SVQs
                test and repair overhead, underground, surface and            in Domestic Appliance Engineering are available at
                submarine electricity and telecommunications                  Level 3.
  7             cables.


                                                                              TASKS
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     • examines equipment and observes reception to
  8             There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                                                                                 determine nature of defect;
                Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/              • uses electronic testing equipment to diagnose
                SVQs are available at Levels 2 and 3.                            faults and check voltages and resistance;


  9

                186      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• dismantles equipment and repairs or replaces        • places prepared parts and sub-assemblies in




                                                                                                                 Major Group 5
   faulty components or wiring;                            position, checks alignment and secures with hand
                                                           tools;
• re-assembles equipment, tests for correct
   functioning and makes any necessary further        • carries out preventative servicing tasks, monitors
   adjustments;                                            the operation of computer equipment, and
                                                           advises on hardware requirements and
• carries out service tasks such as cleaning and
                                                           acquisition.
   insulation testing according to schedule.


RELATED JOB TITLES                                    RELATED JOB TITLES

Radio and television engineer                         Computer engineer                                           1
Service engineer (radio and television)               Computer maintenance engineer
Television engineer                                   Computer service engineer
Television service engineer                           Computer service technician
Video engineer (service and repair)

                                                                                                                  2
5245 COMPUTER ENGINEERS,                              5249 ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONICS
     INSTALLATION AND                                      ENGINEERS NEC
     MAINTENANCE
                                                      Workers in this group perform a variety of electrical
Computer engineers install, maintain and repair       and electronic occupations not elsewhere classified         3
personal computers, mainframe and other computer      in MINOR GROUP 524: Electrical Trades.
hardware.

                                                      TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                      ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                   4
                                                      There are no formal academic requirements although
Entry is possible with a variety of academic          entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades. Training
qualifications and/or relevant experience. Entrants   is usually by apprenticeship and combines practical
typically possess GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H       work experience and technical training. NVQs/
grades, BTEC/SQA awards, an Advanced GNVQ/            SVQs in Servicing Electronic Systems are available          5
GSVQ Level III or a degree. Training is usually       at Levels 2 and 3. Manufacturers may run specialised
provided on-the-job supplemented by specialised       courses related to their products.
courses.       Postgraduate and professional
qualifications, and NVQs/SVQs at Levels 2 and 3
are available.
                                                      TASKS                                                       6
TASKS                                                 • examines drawings, wiring diagrams and
                                                           specifications to determine appropriate methods
• maintains documentation to track and log system          and sequence of operations;
   components and identify system upgrades,
   enhancements and conversions of infrastructure;
                                                      • places prepared parts and sub-assemblies in               7
                                                           position, checks their alignment and secures with
• examines drawings, specifications and wiring             hand tools to install x-ray and medical equipment,
   diagrams to determine appropriate method and            aircraft instruments and other electronic
   sequence of operations;                                 equipment not elsewhere classified;

• installs and maintains hardware incorporating       • connects wire or cable to specified terminals or          8
   PCs and mainframe, and installs optical fibre,          connectors by crimping, brazing, bolting or
   copper cable and other appropriate links;               soldering;


                                                                                                                  9

                                                      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   187
                • examines for defect and repairs, x-ray equipment,
Major Group 5



                   aircraft and ground control electronic equipment,
                   teleprinters, accounting machines, dictating
                   machines, electronic test equipment, railway
                   electrical signalling equipment, sound and
                   television transmission equipment, radar
                   equipment, microwave ovens, metal detectors,
                   medical equipment, office equipment such as
                   printers, photocopiers and fax machines, and
                   other electronic and related equipment not
                   elsewhere classified;

                • tests for correct functioning and makes any
  1                further necessary adjustments;

                • performs routine servicing tasks, such as cleaning
                   and insulation testing.


  2
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Alarm engineer
                Customer engineer (office machinery)
                Electronic engineer (maintenance)
  3             Office machinery mechanic
                Service engineer
                Signal technician (railways)



  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                188      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                               Major Group 5
              SUB-MAJOR GROUP 53
   SKILLED CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING TRADES
Skilled construction and building trades lay stone, brick and similar materials, construct
and repair roofs, install heating, plumbing and ventilating systems, fit windows, doors and
other fixtures, and apply coverings and decorative material to walls, floors and ceilings.


                                MINOR GROUP 531
                              CONSTRUCTION TRADES
Workers within construction trades erect and fit metal framework for building construction,
                                                                                                                1
cut, shape and lay stone, brick and similar materials, cover roofs and exterior walls, install,
maintain and repair plumbing, heating and ventilating systems, construct and install wooden
frameworks and fittings, fit glass into windows and doors, and perform other miscellaneous
construction tasks.                                                                                             2
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

      5311   STEEL ERECTORS
      5312   BRICKLAYERS, MASONS                                                                                3
      5313   ROOFERS, ROOF TILERS AND SLATERS
      5314   PLUMBERS, HEATING AND VENTILATING ENGINEERS
      5315   CARPENTERS AND JOINERS
      5316   GLAZIERS, WINDOW FABRICATORS AND FITTERS                                                           4
      5319   CONSTRUCTION TRADES NEC


                                                                                                                5
5311 STEEL ERECTORS                                 TASKS

Steel erectors fit and erect structural metal       • examines drawings and specifications to assess
framework for buildings and other structures such        job requirements;
as chimneys.
                                                    • erects ladders, scaffolding or working cage;              6
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                    • directs hoisting and positioning of girders and
                                                         other metal parts and checks alignment;
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is    • arranges for or undertakes bolting and welding            7
typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or             of metal parts;
National Traineeship approved by the Construction
Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in    • checks alignment of metal parts using spirit
General Construction at Level 3.                         level and plumb-rule.

                                                                                                                8


                                                                                                                9

                                                    Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   189
Major Group 5


                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                Steel erector
                Steel fabricator                                              There are no formal academic entry requirements,
                Structural erector                                            though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
                                                                              typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
                                                                              National Traineeship approved by the Construction
                5312 BRICKLAYERS, MASONS                                      Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ
                                                                              in General Construction at Level 3.
                Bricklayers and masons erect and repair structures
                of stone, brick and similar materials and cut, shape
                and polish granite, marble, slate and other stone for         TASKS
                building, ornamental and other purposes.
  1                                                                           • measures roof or exterior wall and calculates
                                                                                 required amounts of underfelt, tiles, slates or
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                         thatching material;
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              • cuts wooden battens, felt and underfelt to
                There are no formal academic entry requirements,                 required size;
  2             though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
                typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or                  • lays and secures underfelt and covers with hot
                National Traineeship approved by the Construction                bitumen or other adhesive compound;
                Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
                General Construction at Level 3.                              • lays, aligns and secures successive overlapping
                                                                                 layers of roofing material;
  3                                                                           • seals edges of roof with mortar and ensures that
                TASKS
                                                                                 joints are watertight.
                • examines drawings, photographs and
                   specifications to determine job requirements;
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
  4             • marks and cuts stone using hammers, mallet and
                                                                              Felt roofer
                   hand or pneumatic chisels;
                                                                              Roof sheeter
                • spreads mortar on foundations and bricks, and               Roof tiler
                   places, levels and aligns bricks in mortar bed;            Roofer
                                                                              Roofing contractor
                • uses hand and power tools to shape, trim, carve,
  5                cut letters in and polish stone;
                                                                              Slater
                                                                              Slater and tiler
                • levels, aligns and embeds stone in mortar and               Thatcher
                   faces brick, concrete or steel frame with stone to
                   make and repair structures.
                                                                              5314 PLUMBERS, HEATING AND
  6                                                                                VENTILATING ENGINEERS
                RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              Workers in this unit group assemble, install, maintain
                Bricklayer                                                    and repair plumbing fixtures, heating and ventilating
                Mason                                                         systems and pipes and pipeline systems in
                Monumental mason                                              commercial, residential and industrial
  7             Stone mason                                                   establishments.


                5313 ROOFERS, ROOF TILERS AND                                 TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                     SLATERS
  8             Workers in this unit group cover roofs and exterior           There are no formal academic requirements although
                walls with felting, sheeting, slates, tiles and thatch        GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. NVQs/SVQs
                to provide a waterproof surface.                              in Mechanical Engineering Services are available



  9

                190      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 5
at Levels 2 and 3. Modern Apprenticeships are            TASKS
available for plumbing and lead to an NVQ/SVQ at
Level 3.                                                 • examines drawings and specifications to
                                                              determine job requirements;

TASKS
                                                         • selects and measures appropriate wood and cuts,
                                                              shapes and drills to specification using saws,
• examines drawings and specifications to                     planes, chisels and other power or hand tools;
   determine layout of system;                           • aligns and fixes prepared wood pieces by
                                                              screwing, nailing, gluing and dowelling to form
• measures and cuts required lengths of copper,
                                                              frames, shop fronts, counter units, decking,
   lead, steel, iron, aluminium or plastic using hand
                                                              theatrical sets, furniture, small wooden craft,
   or machine tools;
                                                              scale models and wooden templates;                     1
• installs fittings such as storage tanks, cookers,
   baths, toilets, taps and valves, refrigerators,
                                                         • checks accuracy of work with square, rule and
                                                              spirit level;
   boilers, radiators and fires;

• tests completed installation for leaks and makes       • maintains and repairs woodwork and fittings.
   any necessary adjustments;                                                                                        2
• attaches fittings and joins piping by welding,         RELATED JOB TITLES
   soldering, cementing, fusing, screwing or other
   methods;                                              Boat builder
                                                         Builder's joiner
• repairs burst pipes and mechanical and                 Carpenter                                                   3
   combustion faults and replaces faulty taps,           Carpenter and joiner
   washers, valves, etc.                                 Shop fitter


RELATED JOB TITLES                                       5316 GLAZIERS, WINDOW                                       4
Air conditioning engineer                                     FABRICATORS AND FITTERS
Gas service engineer                                     Workers in this unit group install pre-glazed wooden,
Heating engineer                                         metal or PVC framework, and cut, fit and set glass
Plumber                                                  in windows, doors, shop fronts, and other structural
Plumbing and heating engineer                            frames.                                                     5

5315 CARPENTERS AND JOINERS                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Carpenters and joiners construct, erect, install and
repair wooden structures and fittings used in internal
                                                         There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                                                                                                                     6
and external frameworks and cut, shape, fit and
assemble wood to make templates, jigs, scale models      Entry is typically through a Modern Apprenticeship
and scenic equipment for theatres.                       in Glazing Installation or Installing Architectural
                                                         Glazing Systems leading to an NVQ/SVQ at Level 3.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                                                                             7
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                TASKS

There are no formal academic entry requirements,         • examines drawings or specifications to determine
though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is              job requirements;
typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
National Traineeship approved by the Construction        • scores plain, coloured, safety and ornamental             8
Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in              glass with hand cutter and breaks off glass by
General Construction at Level 3.                              hand or with pliers;



                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   191
                • smoothes edges of glass and positions and secures           • maintains and repairs steeples, industrial
Major Group 5



                   in frame or grooved lead strips;                              chimneys and other high structures, and installs
                                                                                 and replaces lightning conductors.
                • applies mastic, putty or adhesive between glass
                   and frame and trims off excess with knife;

                • fixes mirror panels to interior and exterior walls          RELATED JOB TITLES
                   and repairs and replaces broken glass.
                                                                              Builder (building and contracting)
                                                                              Builder and decorator
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            Building contractor
                                                                              General builder
                Double glazing installer                                      Steel fixer
  1             Glass fitter                                                  Steeplejack
                Glazier
                Leaded light maker
                Window fabricator
                Window fitter
  2
                5319 CONSTRUCTION TRADES
                     NEC
                Workers in this unit group undertake a variety of tasks
  3             in the construction, alteration, maintenance and repair
                of buildings, steeples, industrial chimneys and other
                tall structures.


  4             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no formal academic entry requirements,
                though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
                typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
  5             National Traineeship approved by the Construction
                Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
                General Construction at Level 3.



  6             TASKS
                • selects, measures and cuts steel bars, rods and
                   wire to required lengths, positions and fixes
                   reinforcements into position and tensions as
                   required using hydraulic jacks;
  7             • lays bricks, tiles and building blocks to construct,
                   repair and decorate buildings;

                • pours and levels concrete, prepares surfaces for
                   painting and plastering, and mixes and applies
  8                plaster and paint;

                • installs plumbing fixtures, woodwork structures
                   and fittings, and sets glass in frames;



  9

                192      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 5
                                      MINOR GROUP 532
                                      BUILDING TRADES
Workers in this minor group apply plaster and cement mixtures to walls and ceilings, lay
flooring covers and apply paint, varnish, wallpaper, tiles and other protective and decorative
materials to walls and ceilings.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       5321 PLASTERERS
       5322 FLOORERS AND WALL TILERS                                                                                1
       5323 PAINTERS AND DECORATORS


5321 PLASTERERS                                         RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                    2
Plasterers apply plaster and cement mixtures to walls   Plasterer
and ceilings, fix fibrous sheets and cast and fix       Plastering contractor
ornamental plasterwork to the interior or exterior of
buildings.

                                                        5322 FLOORERS AND WALL                                      3
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                     TILERS
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                        Workers in this unit group lay composition mixtures
There are no formal academic entry requirements,        (other than mastic asphalt) to form flooring, plan,
though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
                                                        fit and secure carpet, underlay and linoleum and
                                                        cover and decorate walls and floors with terrazzo
                                                                                                                    4
National Traineeship approved by the Construction       and granolithic mixtures, tiles and mosaic panels.
Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
General Construction at Level 3.

                                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                        ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                    5
TASKS

• mixes, or directs the mixing of, plaster to desired   There are no formal academic entry requirements,
   consistency;                                         though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
                                                        typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
• applies and smoothes one or more coats of plaster     National Traineeship approved by the Construction           6
   and produces a finished surface, using hand tools    Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
   or mechanical spray;                                 General Construction at Level 3.
• pours liquid plaster into mould to cast ornamental
   plaster work;
• measures, cuts, installs and secures plaster board
                                                        TASKS                                                       7
   and/or ornamental plasterwork to walls and           • examines drawings and specifications to
   ceilings;                                                 determine job requirements;
• covers and seals joints between boards and
   finishes surface;
                                                        • cleans floor surface, fixes wooden laying guides
                                                             and mixes, pours and levels granite and terrazzo       8
• checks surface level using line, spirit level and          mixtures, bitumen, synthetic resin or other
   straight edge.                                            composition mixtures to form flooring;



                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   193
                • examines premises to plan suitable layout and               • mixes adhesive or removes self-adhesive backing
Major Group 5



                   cuts, lays and secures underlay, carpet and                   and positions covering material on wall,
                   linoleum;                                                     matching up patterns where appropriate and
                                                                                 removing wrinkles and air bubbles by hand or
                • finishes covering by rolling, smoothing, grouting              brush;
                   or polishing;
                                                                              • sketches outline of lettering or design onto
                • mixes cement screed or other adhesive, cuts and                surface and paints, or presses gold or similar leaf
                   positions floor and wall tiles and checks                     onto adhesive, as required to reproduce design;
                   alignment of tiling with spirit level.
                                                                              • stains, waxes and french polishes wood surfaces
                                                                                 by hand.
                RELATED JOB TITLES
  1
                Carpet fitter                                                 RELATED JOB TITLES
                Carpet planner
                Floor layer                                                   Decorator
                Floor tiler                                                   French polisher
  2             Tile fixer
                Wall tiler
                                                                              House painter
                                                                              Painter
                                                                              Painter and decorator
                                                                              Sign writer
                5323 PAINTERS AND
  3                  DECORATORS
                Workers in this unit group apply paint, varnish,
                wallpaper and other protective and decorative
                materials to interior and exterior walls and surfaces,
                make signs and showcards, paint designs and
  4             lettering on wood, glass, metal, plastics and other
                materials and stain, wax and french polish wood
                surfaces by hand.



                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  5             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no formal academic entry requirements,
                though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
                typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
  6             National Traineeship approved by the Construction
                Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
                General Construction at Level 3.



                TASKS
  7
                • erects working platform or scaffolding up to five
                   metres in height;

                • prepares surfaces by cleaning, sanding and filling
                   cracks and holes with appropriate filler;
  8
                • applies primer, undercoat and finishing coat(s)
                   using brush, roller, or spray equipment;



  9

                194      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                 Major Group 5
               SUB-MAJOR GROUP 54
  TEXTILES, PRINTING AND OTHER SKILLED TRADES
Workers in this sub-major group weave fabrics, make articles of clothing, soft furnishings
and leather goods, upholster vehicle interiors, set and operate printing machines, prepare
meat, poultry and fish, bake bread and flour based confectionery products, and prepare
food within hotels, restaurants and other establishments, and perform a variety of other
skilled trades not elsewhere classified.


                             MINOR GROUP 541                                                                      1
                      TEXTILES AND GARMENTS TRADES
Workers within textiles and garments trades weave fabrics into fibre and carpet, knit garments
from yarn, upholster the seating and interior of vehicles and planes, make soft furnishings,
make, repair and finish leather goods, and make, fit and alter tailored articles of clothing.                     2
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       5411   WEAVERS AND KNITTERS
       5412   UPHOLSTERERS                                                                                        3
       5413   LEATHER AND RELATED TRADES
       5414   TAILORS AND DRESSMAKERS
       5419   TEXTILES, GARMENTS AND RELATED TRADES NEC
                                                                                                                  4

5411 WEAVERS AND KNITTERS                              • sets controls to produce article of specified size
                                                           and pattern;
Weavers and knitters set up and operate hand and
power operated looms and machines to weave fabrics     • places fibre and yarn packages on machine and            5
into fibre and carpet or to knit garments and other        draws them through appropriate guides and
articles from yarn.                                        tensioners;
                                                       • monitors machine operation to detect broken
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                   threads of yarn, the evenness of warp tension
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                  and the quality of output;                             6
Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades or an        • removes completed garments and lengths of
appropriate BTEC/SQA award. Training is usually            fabric from machine;
provided on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in Manufacturing
Textiles are available at Levels 1, 2 and 3 and in
                                                       • cleans and oils machine and reports any
                                                           mechanical faults.
Products from Textiles at Levels 1 and 2.                                                                         7
TASKS                                                  RELATED JOB TITLES

• prepares machine for operation by setting input      Carpet weaver
   packages, feeding thread, fibre or yarn through
   guides, rollers, tensioners and conditioning
                                                       Knitter
                                                       Net maker
                                                                                                                  8
   devices, and securing to output packages, spools    Textile weaver
   or cards;                                           Weaver


                                                                                                                  9

                                                      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   195
Major Group 5



                5412 UPHOLSTERERS                                             5413 LEATHER AND RELATED
                                                                                   TRADES
                Workers in this unit group upholster vehicle, aircraft
                and other seating, fix trimmings to the interiors of          Workers in this unit group make and repair shoes,
                vehicles and aircraft and make mattresses, curtains           cut out, make up, sew, decorate and finish leather
                and other soft furniture.                                     and leather substitute goods other than garments.


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                There are no formal academic requirements although            There are no formal academic requirements although
  1             some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.                    some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
                Training is provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/               Training is mainly on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs are
                SVQs in Upholstered Furniture Production is                   available in some areas.
                available at Level 2.

  2
                TASKS                                                         TASKS

                • measures frame to be covered or examines                    • uses hand tools or machine to cut out, trim, punch
                   drawings or other specifications and cuts material            holes in or stitch guide lines on leather or leather
                                                                                 substitute component parts;
  3                with shears, knife or scissors;

                • tacks and staples or otherwise secures webbing              • positions leather and rubber footwear component
                   to furniture frame;                                           parts on lasts and shapes and joins uppers to
                                                                                 insoles and soles;
                • pads springs and secures padding by stitching,
                                                                              • uses hand tools or machine to make up and repair
  4                stapling, tacking, etc.;
                                                                                 saddles, harnesses, belts, straps and other leather
                • pins sections of coverings together, joins by                  products;
                   sewing and inserts trims, braids and buttons as
                   required;                                                  • uses hand and machine tools to sew and stitch
                                                                                 leather in the making and decoration of footwear
                • operates machine to compress padded spring
  5                assemblies and inserts them into mattress covers;
                                                                                 and leather goods other than garments;

                                                                              • prepares paper or paperboard master patterns of
                • encases bed springs and padding with selected                  component parts of footwear;
                   covering material by hand or machine stitching
                   and fits castors where required;                           • waxes, cleans and finishes footwear and other
  6             • fits upholstery unit to frame or replaces covering,
                                                                                 leather goods.
                   padding, webbing or springs to repair upholstered
                   furniture.
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES

  7             RELATED JOB TITLES                                            Clicker (footwear mfr)
                                                                              Cobbler
                Coach trimmer                                                 Laster
                Curtain maker                                                 Saddler
                Interior sprung mattress maker                                Shoe maker
  8             Upholsterer                                                   Shoe repairer




  9

                196      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 5
5414 TAILORS AND                                         TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
     DRESSMAKERS                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Tailors and dressmakers prepare patterns and make,       Entry may not depend on academic qualifications.
fit and alter tailored garments, dresses and other       Training is mainly on-the-job.
articles of light clothing.

                                                         TASKS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                • marks out, cuts and sews corsets, light clothing
                                                              and hoods and aprons and makes and repairs
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
                                                              sails, boat covers and other canvas goods;
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades. A Modern Apprenticeship in Handicraft            • fills and stuffs cushions, quilts, soft toys and
                                                                                                                     1
Tailoring is available leading to an NVQ/SVQ at               furniture;
Level 3.
                                                         • examines sketches and draws out patterns for the
                                                              manufacture of garments and upholstery;
TASKS
                                                         • shapes and steams fabric into hats or hoods and           2
• takes customer's measurements and discusses                 gives final shape to fibre helmets and felt hats;
   required style and material;
                                                         • performs other tasks not elsewhere classified, for
• prepares individual or adapts stock pattern;                example, forms mounts for wigs, makes powder
                                                              puffs and buttons, shapes hat brims, and staples
• arranges pattern on correct grain of fabric, in             seams of industrial gloves.
                                                                                                                     3
   most economical layout, marks position and cuts
   out garment parts with shears;
• pins garment on customer or dummy model and            RELATED JOB TITLES
   makes any necessary alterations;
• sews garment parts together by hand or machine,        Corsetiere                                                  4
   makes buttonholes and sews on fasteners and           Cushion filler
   trimmings;                                            Hat blocker
                                                         Sailmaker
• shapes garment by pressing seams, pleats, etc.;
• determines any necessary alterations and                                                                           5
   removes or inserts stitching, lengthens or shortens
   garment parts and adjusts seams, darts, etc. as
   required.


RELATED JOB TITLES                                                                                                   6
Alteration hand
Dressmaker
Milliner
Tailoress
                                                                                                                     7
5419 TEXTILES, GARMENTS AND
     RELATED TRADES NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
textiles and related craft occupations not elsewhere
                                                                                                                     8
classified in MINOR GROUP 541: Textiles and
Garments Trades.


                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   197
Major Group 5



                                                         MINOR GROUP 542
                                                         PRINTING TRADES
                Printing and related trades workers compose and set type and printing blocks, produce
                printing plates, cylinders and film, operate printing machines and bind the finished printed
                product.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       5421    ORIGINATORS, COMPOSITORS AND PRINT PREPARERS
  1                    5422    PRINTERS
                       5423    BOOKBINDERS AND PRINT FINISHERS
                       5424    SCREEN PRINTERS


  2             5421 ORIGINATORS,                                             • examines proof copies and makes any necessary
                     COMPOSITORS AND PRINT                                       alterations to type;
                     PREPARERS                                                • processes filmsetting or desktop publishing
                                                                                 output to produce image on film or sensitised
                Originators, compositors and print preparers prepare
                                                                                 paper;
  3             printing layouts, make printing plates from moulds,
                set out photographed material, transfer film images           • treats plates and cylinders with ultraviolet light
                to plates or cylinders and lay out printing copy to be           and chemicals to produce film positives;
                photographed.
                                                                              • arranges and pastes printing material onto paper
                                                                                 ready for photographing.
  4             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                There are no formal academic requirements although
                some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.                    Compositor
  5             Training is typically received on-the-job. National           Lithographic planner
                                                                              Lithographic plate maker
                Traineeships and Modern Apprenticeships in
                Origination are available at NVQ/SVQ Levels 2 and             Paste-up artist
                3 respectively.                                               Stereotyper
                                                                              Type setter

  6             TASKS
                                                                              5422 PRINTERS
                • lays sheet of plastic, rubber, wax or pulp board
                   on former and passes under hydraulic press to              Printers operate printing presses, prepare printing
                   form mould;                                                plates and compose and assemble type and printing
  7             • determines from specification the kind and size
                                                                              blocks.
                   of type to be used and prepares page layout, and
                   operates keyboard of perforating, composing, or
                   filmsetting machine;                                       TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                • inputs original copy into computer and
  8                manipulates text, illustrations and layout using           There are no formal academic requirements although
                   desktop publishing software to produce desired             some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
                   image;                                                     Training is typically received on-the-job. National


  9

                198      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                        • trims head, tail and fore-edge of book and gilds




                                                                                                                   Major Group 5
Traineeships and Modern Apprenticeships in
Machine Printing are available at NVQ/SVQ Levels             and marbles page edges as necessary;
2 and 3 respectively.
                                                        • cuts board and cloth for book cover and spine;
                                                        • embosses lettering or decoration on cover by hand
TASKS                                                        or machine;

• examine customer's requirements to determine          • repairs worn bookbindings.
   appropriate format and kind and size of type;

• prepares composed type or printing plate              RELATED JOB TITLES
   according to type of press used;

• positions form or plate on machine, sets press        Binder's assistant                                          1
   and prints proof copies;                             Bookbinder
                                                        Collator (printing)
• examines proof copies and adjusts press as            Darkroom technician
   necessary;                                           Print finisher

• starts or directs start of printing run and ensures                                                               2
   that printing proceeds smoothly.
                                                        5424 SCREEN PRINTERS
                                                        Screen printers set and operate screen printing
RELATED JOB TITLES                                      machines and print lettering and designs on metal,
                                                        glass, plastics, paper and other materials by hand or       3
General printer                                         machine.
Master printer
Printer
                                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND

5423 BOOKBINDERS AND PRINT
                                                        ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                   4
     FINISHERS                                          There are no formal academic requirements although
                                                        some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
Bookbinders and print finishers bind and/or finish      Training is typically received on-the-job. National
printed products by hand or machine.                    Traineeships and Modern Apprenticeships in
                                                        Machine Printing are available at NVQ/SVQ Levels            5
                                                        2 and 3 respectively.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                        TASKS
There are no formal academic requirements although                                                                  6
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.              • positions item for printing against guide marks
Training is typically received on-the-job. National          on work bench;
Traineeships and Modern Apprenticeships in
Machine Printing are available at NVQ/SVQ Levels        • pours colour into machine or directly onto screen
2 and 3 respectively.                                        and positions screen over item;

                                                        • operates squeegee by hand or machine to press
                                                                                                                    7
                                                             colour through screen;
TASKS
                                                        • dips wooden pattern block into colour tray and
• folds, collates and sews printed sheets by hand            lays different colours on top of, and adjacent to,
   or machine;                                               others to form the required pattern;                   8
• compresses sewn book in nipping machine to            • examines screen print during run and makes any
   expel air and reduce swelling caused by sewing;           necessary adjustments.


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   199
Major Group 5


                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Block printer
                Screen printer
                Silk screen printer




  1


  2


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                200      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 5
                                MINOR GROUP 543
                            FOOD PREPARATION TRADES
Workers in food preparation trades slaughter livestock, cut, trim and prepare meat, poultry
and fish and prepare, bake and finish bread and flour confectionery products, and prepares,
seasons and cooks food in hotels, restaurants and other establishments.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       5431    BUTCHERS, MEAT CUTTERS
       5432    BAKERS, FLOUR CONFECTIONERS                                                                          1
       5433    FISHMONGERS, POULTRY DRESSERS
       5434    CHEFS, COOKS


5431 BUTCHERS, MEAT CUTTERS                             RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                    2
Butchers and meat cutters direct and undertake the      Butcher
slaughter of animals and prepare carcasses for          Butcher's cutter
storage, processing and sale.                           Meat cutter
                                                        Slaughterer                                                 3
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                               5432 BAKERS, FLOUR
                                                             CONFECTIONERS
There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.              Bakers and flour confectioners prepare and bake
                                                                                                                    4
Training is typically by apprenticeship. National       dough, pastry and cake mixtures and make and finish
Traineeships leading to NVQ Level 2 in Meat             flour confectioners' products by hand.
Processing are available. SVQs are available at
Levels 1, 2 and 3. Professional qualifications are
also available.                                         TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                    5
                                                        ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TASKS                                                   There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                                                        Training is typically received on-the-job or by
• slaughters animal and removes skin, hide, hairs,      apprenticeship. Modern Apprenticeships and
   internal organs, etc.;                               National Traineeships leading to NVQs/SVQs at               6
                                                        Levels 2 and 3 are available.
• cuts or saws carcasses into manageable
   proportions;

• removes bones, gristle, surplus fat, rind and other   TASKS
   waste material;                                                                                                  7
                                                        • weighs flour and other ingredients according to
• cuts carcass parts into chops, joints, steaks, etc.        recipe;
   for sale;
                                                        • mixes ingredients using hand or machine and
• prepares meat for curing or other processing;              adds water or other liquids to obtain the required
   cleans tools and work surfaces.                           consistency;                                           8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   201
                • rolls, cuts, stretches, kneads and moulds mixture
Major Group 5



                                                                              5434 CHEFS, COOKS
                   to form bread, rolls, buns, cakes and pastry
                   shapes;                                                    Chefs and cooks plan menus and prepare, season
                                                                              and cook food in hotels, restaurants, clubs, private
                • allows dough to rise and fills and glazes pastry;           households and other establishments.
                • makes cake decorations, spreads icing, fillings
                   and toppings and sprinkles sugar and other
                   confections on products.                                   TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                                                                              There are no formal academic requirements.
                RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              Training is provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/
  1             Baker
                                                                              SVQs in Food Preparation and Cooking are available
                                                                              at Levels 1, 2 and 3. Modern Apprenticeships
                Baker and confectioner
                                                                              leading to an NVQ/SVQ at Level 3 are also available.
                Cake decorator
                                                                              Courses are also run by private cookery schools.
                Confectioner (not retail trade)

  2                                                                           TASKS
                5433 FISHMONGERS, POULTRY
                     DRESSERS                                                 • requisitions or purchases and examines
                                                                                 foodstuffs to ensure quality;
                Fishmongers and poultry dressers clean, cut and
  3             prepare poultry carcasses and fish for processing or          • plans meals, prepares, seasons and cooks
                sale.                                                            foodstuffs;

                                                                              • plans and co-ordinates kitchen work such as
                                                                                 fetching, clearing and cleaning of equipment and
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                         utensils.
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  4
                Academic qualifications may not be required.
                Training is typically provided on-the-job.                    RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              Caterer
                                                                              Chef
  5             TASKS                                                         Cook
                                                                              Cook in charge
                • removes feathers and internal organs, extracts              Head cook
                   edible offal and cuts off feet and head from
                   poultry carcass as required;

  6             • scrubs, heads, guts, washes and bones fish;
                • cuts and slits fish for curing by hand or machine;
                • cleans tools and work surfaces.

  7
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Filleter (fish)
                Fishmonger
                Poultry dresser
  8


  9

                202      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 5
                                     MINOR GROUP 549
                                   SKILLED TRADES NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a `variety of craft and related trades not elsewhere
classified in MAJOR GROUP 5: Skilled Trades Occupations.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       5491 GLASS AND CERAMICS MAKERS, DECORATORS AND
            FINISHERS
       5492 FURNITURE MAKERS, OTHER CRAFT WOODWORKERS                                                                1
       5493 PATTERN MAKERS (MOULDS)
       5494 MUSICAL INSTRUMENT MAKERS AND TUNERS
       5495 GOLDSMITHS, SILVERSMITHS, PRECIOUS STONE WORKERS
       5496 FLORAL ARRANGERS, FLORISTS                                                                               2
       5499 HAND CRAFT OCCUPATIONS NEC



5491 GLASS AND CERAMICS                                  • throws, casts and presses clay by hand or machine         3
     MAKERS, DECORATORS AND                                   to form pottery, stoneware or refractory goods
                                                              such as bricks, crucibles, ornaments, sanitary
     FINISHERS
                                                              furnishings, saggars, cups, saucers, plates and
Glass and ceramics makers, form, shape, decorate,             roofing tiles;
smooth and polish glassware, earthenware, refractory
goods, clay bricks and other ceramic goods.              • cuts and joins unfired stoneware pipes to form            4
                                                              junctions and gullies, moulds sealing bands on
                                                              clay pipes, prepares and joins porcelain or
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      earthenware components and assists crucible
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     makers and stone workers with their tasks;

                                                         • applies decorative designs and finishes to
                                                                                                                     5
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/              glassware, optical glass and ceramic goods by
SVQs at Levels 1, 2 and 3 are available in some areas.        grinding, smoothing, polishing, cutting, etching,
                                                              dipping, painting or transferring patterns or
                                                              labels.
TASKS
                                                                                                                     6
• uses hand tools and operates machinery to heat,        RELATED JOB TITLES
   bend, shape, press, drill and cut glass;
                                                         Brick maker
• makes artificial eyes, laminated glass sheets or       Caster (ceramics mfr)                                       7
   blocks, glass fibre tissue, wool, filament and
                                                         Ceramic artist
   matting, marks optical lenses and assembles
                                                         Glass blower
   rimless spectacles;
                                                         Glass cutter
• makes models and moulds from moulding clay             Glass maker
   and plaster for use in the making and casting of
   pottery and other ceramic goods;
                                                         Lithographer (ceramics mfr)
                                                         Potter
                                                                                                                     8


                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   203
Major Group 5



                5492 FURNITURE MAKERS,                                        5493 PATTERN MAKERS (MOULDS)
                     OTHER CRAFT
                                                                              Pattern makers (moulds) make patterns from wood,
                     WOODWORKERS                                              metal, plaster and plastics for use in making moulds
                Furniture makers and other craft woodworkers make,            for metal castings.
                repair and restore wooden furniture, decorative
                objects and other crafted pieces of woodwork.
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     There are no formal entry requirements, although
                                                                              some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
  1             There are no formal entry requirements, although              Training is typically provided by an apprenticeship
                entrants typically possess a variety of academic and          combining technical training and practical work
                vocational qualifications. Training is provided off-          experience.
                and on-the-job. A number of NVQs/SVQs covering
                various aspects of furniture production and wood
                machining are available at Levels 1, 2 and 3. A
  2             Modern Apprenticeship in Cabinet Making is
                                                                              TASKS

                available at NVQ/SVQ Level 3.                                 • examines drawings and specifications to
                                                                                 determine job requirements and appropriate
                                                                                 materials;
                TASKS
  3                                                                           • selects, measures, cuts and shapes wood using
                • examines drawings and specifications to                        hand and machine tools to form wooden patterns;
                   determine job requirements and appropriate
                                                                              • machines and fits metal castings and/or metal
                   materials;
                                                                                 parts to form metal;
                • selects, measures, cuts and shapes wood using               • pours plaster around wooden pattern and fills
  4                saws, chisels, planes, powered handtools and
                                                                                 plaster mould with resin to form pattern;
                   woodworking machines;
                                                                              • compares pattern dimensions with original
                • assembles parts with nails, screws, dowels or                  drawings using callipers, micrometers,
                   adhesives and fits locks, catches, hinges, castors,
                                                                                 protractors, etc.;
                   drawers, shelves and other fittings;
  5             • removes, replaces or repairs damaged parts of
                                                                              • smoothes surface of pattern with grinding
                                                                                 machine or emery cloth.
                   wooden furniture;

                • measures floor area to be covered and lays wood
                   blocks, parquet panels or hardwood strips;                 RELATED JOB TITLES
  6             • matches and marks out veneers ready for cutting             Engineer's pattern maker
                   and examines and repairs defects in veneer or              Model maker (engineering)
                   plywood sheets.                                            Pattern maker (metal trades)
                                                                              Wood pattern maker

  7             RELATED JOB TITLES

                Antiques restorer                                             5494 MUSICAL INSTRUMENT
                Cabinet maker                                                      MAKERS AND TUNERS
                Coffin maker
                Furniture fitter                                              Musical instrument makers and tuners make, adjust,
  8             Picture frame maker                                           string, tune and repair musical instruments, make
                Veneer preparer                                               bows and assemble, install and regulate piano action
                Wood carver                                                   parts.



  9

                204      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                  Major Group 5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                               is either by apprenticeship or study for a pre-
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                              vocational qualification. These range from craft to
                                                       degree level awards.
Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades.
Training is by apprenticeship or through specialised
college courses.                                       TASKS

                                                       • marks out and cleans stone and operates lathe,
TASKS                                                       grinding wheel, or rotating disc to cut, shape and
                                                            smooth stone;
• examines drawings and specifications to
   determine appropriate materials and job             • uses hand and machine tools to make mounts and
   requirements;                                            then to set gems in prepared mounts;
                                                                                                                   1
• selects, cuts, drills, carves and planes wood to     • cuts blank metal pieces and uses hand and
   make up parts for the assembly of pianos, organs,        machine tools to beat, spin or form metal to
   violins, cellos and other instruments;                   required shape;
• assembles and joins prepared parts such as body      • assembles metal pieces by soldering, bolting,
   sections, springs, pads, keys, pipes, dampers,           brazing and riveting to form tea services,             2
   bellows, stretched vellum, etc. to make wind and         tankards, jewellery and other precious metal
   string instruments, drums, organs and bows;              articles;
• uses tuning fork and hand tools to tune pianos       • anneals, butts, decorates, etches out monographs,
   and organs and adjusts organ pipes to improve            crests and designs using hand and machine tools;
   tone quality, volume and pitch;                                                                                 3
                                                       • makes master pattern of articles using wood, wax,
• fits prepared action assemblies and pedal                 metal, or other materials.
   movements into piano cases and repairs or
   replaces worn or broken strings, dampers,
   hammers and felt.
                                                       RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                   4
                                                       Diamond mounter
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                       Diamond polisher
                                                       Gem setter
Musical instrument maker
Organ builder                                          Goldsmith
Piano tuner                                            Manufacturing jeweller                                      5
Violin repairer                                        Silversmith



5495 GOLDSMITHS,                                       5496 FLORAL ARRANGERS,
     SILVERSMITHS, PRECIOUS                                 FLORISTS                                               6
     STONE WORKERS                                     Floral arrangers and florists design and make up
Goldsmiths, silversmiths and precious stone workers    floral bouquets, wreaths, tributes and other floral
make and repair jewellery and precious metalware,      arrangements for sale to the public.
set, cut and polish gems and other stones, decorate
metalware and make master patterns for articles of                                                                 7
jewellery.                                             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                       ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                               There are no formal academic entry requirements,
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                              although some employers may request GCSEs/S
                                                       grades. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.           8
GCSEs/S grades are not usually required, though        NVQs/SVQs in Floristry are available at Levels 2
some may be required for full-time courses. Training   and 3. Professional qualifications are also available.



                                                                                                                   9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   205
                                                                               • makes wigs, beards and other artificial hairpieces
Major Group 5


                TASKS
                                                                                  from human hair or synthetic materials;
                • purchases fresh flowers and other floristry items
                   such as ribbons, wire, cards, artificial flowers            • interweaves canes of willow, withy, bamboo,
                   etc. from wholesalers;                                         rattan or similar material to make baskets and
                                                                                  other pieces of wickerwork;
                • designs wreaths, bouquets, posies and button
                   holes and selects appropriate foliage trimmings;            • charges fireworks, cartridges and other munitions
                                                                                  with explosive material;
                • wraps flower stems as necessary and selects or
                   makes up suitable frame for flower arrangement;             • makes childrens toys, dolls, models, candles,
                                                                                  artificial flowers and other fancy goods
                • secures flowers to frame and adds foliage,
                                                                               • makes, maintains and adapts surgical and
  1                ribbons, etc. until the desired effect is achieved;
                                                                                  orthopaedic appliances.
                • arranges for the delivery of floral arrangements
                   as requested by the customer.
                                                                               RELATED JOB TITLES

  2             RELATED JOB TITLES                                             Basket maker (not wire)
                                                                               Billiard table fitter
                Floral designer                                                Blind maker
                Florist                                                        Lampshade maker
                Flower arranger                                                Toy maker
                                                                               Wig maker
  3
                5499 HAND CRAFT OCCUPATIONS
                     NEC
                Workers in this unit group engrave jewellery and
  4             stoneware, make artificial hairpieces, charge fireworks
                and munitions with explosive material, and make
                lampshades, wickerwork, toys, dolls, models, candles,
                artificial flowers, other fancy goods, and perform other
                hand craft occupations not elsewhere classified in
                MINOR GROUP 549: Skilled Trades n.e.c.
  5
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

  6             There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                Training is typically via apprenticeship or through
                specialised courses. NVQs/SVQs are available in
                some areas.


  7             TASKS

                • uses hand or machine tools to engrave letters,
                   patterns and other designs on jewellery and
                   stoneware;
  8             • constructs wire frames for lampshades, arranges
                   and stretches covering material over frame, and
                   secures covering material;


  9

                206       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                            Major Group 6
                       MAJOR GROUP 6
                PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
This major group covers occupations whose tasks involve the provision of a service to
customers, whether in a public protective or personal care capacity. The main tasks
associated with these occupations involve the care of the sick and the elderly; the supervision
of children; the care of animals; and the provision of travel, personal care and hygiene
services.


Most occupations in this major group require a good standard of general education and                        1
vocational training. To ensure high levels of integrity, some occupations require professional
qualifications or registration with professional bodies.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:
                                                                                                             2
61 CARING PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
    611    HEALTHCARE AND RELATED PERSONAL SERVICES
    612    CHILDCARE AND RELATED PERSONAL SERVICES                                                           3
    613    ANIMAL CARE SERVICES

62 LEISURE AND OTHER PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
    621    LEISURE AND TRAVEL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS                                                            4
    622    HAIRDRESSERS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
    623    HOUSEKEEPING OCCUPATIONS
    629    PERSONAL SERVICES OCCUPATIONS NEC
                                                                                                             5


                                                                                                             6


                                                                                                             7


                                                                                                             8


                                                                                                             9

                                                 Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   207
Major Group 6



                                   SUB-MAJOR GROUP 61
                          CARING PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this sub-major group assist health professionals in the care of patients, supervise
                the activities of pre-school age children, assist teachers with non-teaching duties, provide
                technical assistance to veterinarians, and provide other services in the care of animals.


                                     MINOR GROUP 611
                         HEALTHCARE AND RELATED PERSONAL SERVICES
  1             Workers in health care and related personal services transport patients by ambulance,
                stretcher, wheelchair or other means and assist health professionals with the care of patients
                in hospitals, dental surgeries, nursing homes, clinics and within the home.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
  2
                       6111    NURSING AUXILIARIES AND ASSISTANTS
                       6112    AMBULANCE STAFF (EXCLUDING PARAMEDICS)
                       6113    DENTAL NURSES
  3                    6114    HOUSEPARENTS AND RESIDENTIAL WARDENS
                       6115    CARE ASSISTANTS AND HOME CARERS


  4
                6111 NURSING AUXILIARIES AND                                  • prepares patient for examination and treatment;
                     ASSISTANTS                                               • distributes and serves food, assists patients in
                Nursing auxiliaries and assistants assist doctors,               feeding and prepares snacks and hot drinks;
  5             nurses and other health professionals in caring for
                the sick and injured within hospitals, homes, clinics
                                                                              • assists patients in washing, dressing, toiletry
                                                                                 activities and general mobility;
                and the wider community.
                                                                              • changes bed linen, makes beds and tidies
                                                                                 wards.
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  6             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no formal academic entry requirements.              RELATED JOB TITLES
                Off- and on-the-job training is provided. NVQs/
                SVQs in Care are available at Levels 2 and 3.                 Assistant nurse
                                                                              Nursing assistant
  7                                                                           Nursing auxiliary
                TASKS                                                         Occupational therapy helper
                                                                              Operating department assistant
                • performs basic clinical tasks such as taking                Phlebotomist
                   patients' temperature and pulse, weighing and              Physiotherapy helper
  8                measuring, performing urine tests and extracting           Ward assistant
                   blood samples;                                             Ward orderly




  9

                208      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 6
6112 AMBULANCE STAFF                                    entrants work towards the National Certificate for
     (EXCLUDING PARAMEDICS)                             Dental Nurses.

Ambulance staff transport sick, injured and
convalescent persons and give first aid treatment in    TASKS
emergencies.
                                                        • prepares patient for examination;
                                                        • prepares and sterilises instruments;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                               • hands required equipment and medication to
                                                             dentist during examination;
Academic qualifications are not normally required.
Entry requirements vary between ambulance               • assists with minor treatment, such as preparing           1
services. Entrants must have usually possessed a             materials for fillings;
full clean driving licence for one to two years.
Entrants undertake a minimum of 2 weeks training        • maintains records, processes and mounts x-ray
in first aid and patient care. The ambulance                 films and undertakes reception duties.
proficiency certificate is awarded upon completion
of 12 to 18 months of assessed practical experience
                                                                                                                    2
in an accident and emergency environment.               RELATED JOB TITLES

                                                        Dental nurse
TASKS                                                   Dental surgery assistant
                                                                                                                    3
• drives ambulance or accompanies driver to
   transport patients to hospitals or other treatment   6114 HOUSEPARENTS AND
   centres and homes;
                                                             RESIDENTIAL WARDENS
• ascertains nature of injuries and provides first
                                                        Houseparents and residential wardens are
   aid treatment;
                                                        responsible for the care and supervision of children,       4
• cleans and disinfects ambulance after use;            young offenders and the elderly within residential
                                                        homes and nurseries, schools or institutions for
• replenishes medical supplies in ambulance as          young offenders.
   necessary.
                                                                                                                    5
                                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
RELATED JOB TITLES                                      ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Ambulance driver                                        There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Ambulance technician                                    Entrants must typically be 18 years old and have
Ambulanceman/woman                                      experience of working in a care environment. Both
                                                                                                                    6
                                                        off- and on-the-job training is available. BTEC/SQA
                                                        awards and NVQs/SVQs covering various aspects
6113 DENTAL NURSES                                      of care are available.

Dental nurses prepare patients for, and assist with,
dental examinations, prepare and sterilise
                                                                                                                    7
                                                        TASKS
instruments and maintain case records.
                                                        • creates friendly, secure atmosphere and tries to
                                                             gain the trust and confidence of those in the home
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                     or under supervision;
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                                                                           8
                                                        • plans and participates in games and leisure
Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades.                    activities to encourage emotional, social, physical
Training is available both off- and on-the-job. Most         and intellectual development;


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   209
Major Group 6


                • ensures that all material needs of residents are            RELATED JOB TITLES
                   provided and endeavours to resolve any
                   problems that they may have;                               Care assistant
                                                                              Home care assistant
                • establishes and maintains contact with members              Night care assistant
                   of the neighbouring community and/or the                   Residential social worker
                   residents' family and friends;

                • maintains contact and discusses problems/
                   progress with other staff and social workers.



  1             RELATED JOB TITLES

                Houseparent
                Matron (residential home)
                Resident warden
                Warden (sheltered housing)
  2

                6115 CARE ASSISTANTS AND
                     HOME CARERS
  3
                Care assistants and home carers attend to the personal
                needs and comforts of the elderly and infirm, either
                within residential establishments or at home.


  4             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                Entrants must typically be 18 years old and have
  5             experience of working in a care environment. Both
                off- and on-the-job training is available. BTEC/SQA
                awards and NVQs/SVQs covering various aspects
                of care are available.

  6
                TASKS

                • assists residents to dress, undress, wash and
                   bathe;
  7             • serves meals to residents at table or in bed;
                • accompanies infirm residents on outings and
                   assists with recreational activities;

                • undertakes light cleaning and domestic duties as
  8                required.




  9

                210      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 6
                       MINOR GROUP 612
           CHILDCARE AND RELATED PERSONAL SERVICES
Workers in childcare and related personal services supervise play and other activities for
pre-school age children, assist teachers with their non-teaching duties and care for children
in day or residential nurseries, children's homes and private households.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       6121    NURSERY NURSES
       6122    CHILDMINDERS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS                                                                  1
       6123    PLAYGROUP LEADERS/ASSISTANTS
       6124    EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANTS


                                                                                                                     2
6121 NURSERY NURSES                                      6122 CHILDMINDERS AND
                                                              RELATED OCCUPATIONS
Nursery nurses care for children in day or residential
nurseries, children's homes, maternity units and         Childminders and related occupations perform a
similar establishments.                                  variety of domestic activities in the day-to-day care       3
                                                         of children, and supervise and participate in their
                                                         play, educational and other activities.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades
                                                         TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                     4
followed by the award of a certificate from the
Council for Awards in Childrens Care and Education.      Entry may not depend upon academic qualifications,
NVQs/SVQs in Child Care and Education are                although employers may expect a candidate to
available at Levels 2 and 3.                             possess a qualification accredited the Council for
                                                         Awards in Children's Care or other qualifications.          5
                                                         Childminders must be registered with local
TASKS                                                    authorities to verify their fitness to provide day care.
                                                         NVQs/SVQs in Child Care and Education are
• baths, dresses, prepares feed for and feeds babies;    available at Levels 2 and 3.

• changes babies clothing whenever necessary;                                                                        6
• supervises young children at mealtimes;                TASKS

• organises games and other activities and               • assists children to wash and dress;
   supervises children's play.
                                                         • prepares and serves children's meals and                  7
                                                              supervises children during meals;
RELATED JOB TITLES                                       • mends, washes and irons children's clothes and
                                                              tidies their rooms;
Crèche assistant
Nursery assistant
Nursery nurse
                                                         • supervises and participates in children's games,
                                                              play, educational and other activities.
                                                                                                                     8


                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   211
Major Group 6


                RELATED JOB TITLES                                             6124 EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANTS
                Au pair                                                        Educational assistants assist teachers with, or relieve
                Child minder                                                   them of, a variety of non-teaching duties.
                Children's nanny

                                                                               TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                               ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                6123 PLAYGROUP LEADERS/
                     ASSISTANTS                                                Academic qualifications may be required by some
                                                                               employers, although entry is possible with relevant
                Playgroup leaders/assistants deliver and facilitate            experience alone.
  1             play opportunities for children in a range of formal
                and informal settings including play groups, play
                schemes, free play locations and after-school                  TASKS
                activities.
                                                                               • assists teacher with preparation or clearing up
                                                                                  of classroom;
  2             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                               • looks after lesson materials such as paper, pencils
                                                                                  and crayons;
                Entry may not depend upon academic qualifications,             • assists children with washing or dressing for
                although some employers may expect candidate to                   outdoor and similar activities;
  3             possess a certificate from the Council for Awards in
                Children's Care or other qualifications. NVQs/SVQs             • makes simple teaching aids and constructs
                in Child Care and Education are available at Levels               thematic displays of educational material or
                2 and 3.                                                          children's work;

                                                                               • works with individual children as directed by the
  4                                                                               class teachers or other senior member of staff.
                TASKS

                • supervises children's games and encourages the               RELATED JOB TITLES
                   development of physical, social and language
                   skills;
  5                                                                            Classroom helper
                                                                               Education care officer
                • prepares paints, glue, paper, toys, etc. for
                   children's activities;                                      Non-teaching assistant
                                                                               School helper
                • organises and supervises children on excursions;             Special needs helper

  6             • organises and supervises children's activities
                   in accordance with Health and Safety
                   regulations;

                • puts away equipment and cleans premises after
                   use.
  7
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Play leader
  8             Playgroup assistant
                Playgroup leader




  9

                212       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 6
                                   MINOR GROUP 613
                                ANIMAL CARE SERVICES
Workers in this minor group provide technical assistance to veterinarians, care for animals
in stables, kennels, zoos and other such establishments, provide specialised grooming and
clipping services for animals and capture stray or unruly dogs.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       6131 VETERINARY NURSES AND ASSISTANTS
       6139 ANIMAL CARE OCCUPATIONS NEC                                                                             1

6131 VETERINARY NURSES AND                              6139 ANIMAL CARE
     ASSISTANTS                                              OCCUPATIONS NEC
Veterinary nurses and assistants provide technical      Workers in this unit group care for animals held in
                                                                                                                    2
assistance to veterinarians in the treatment and care   kennels, stables, zoos and similar establishments,
of sick or injured animals.                             provide specialised grooming, clipping and trimming
                                                        services for animals, and searches for and captures
                                                        stray or nuisance dogs in public areas.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                                                                            3
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Entrants require GCSEs/S grades or an equivalent        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
qualification. Entrants must obtain employment at       ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
an approved veterinary practice to gain practical
experience and tuition with an employer for a           Entry is possible without formal academic                   4
minimum duration of two years. Candidates must          qualifications, although some employers may ask for
also pass professional examinations before              GCSEs/S grades. There are a variety of vocational
qualifying as a veterinary nurse.                       qualifications available, including NVQs/SVQs in
                                                        Animal Care at Levels 1 and 2, and in Dog Grooming
                                                        at Levels 2 and 3.                                          5
TASKS

• carries out tests, operates x-ray equipment to aid
   the diagnosis and treatment of animal injuries       TASKS
   and disorders and prepares animals for autopsies;
                                                        • feeds, washes, grooms, trims and exercises                6
• prepares operating theatre, sterilises equipment           animals;
   and assists in theatre as required;
                                                        • cleans animals' quarters and renews bedding as
• dispenses medicines and applies dressings to               necessary;
   animals;
• feeds, waters and exercises animals and keeps         • checks animals for illness, treats minor ailments         7
   their quarters clean and tidy.                            or calls for vet if further treatment is required;

                                                        • meets prospective owners and advises on animal
                                                             selection and animal care;
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                        • patrols public areas to search for and capture
Animal technician                                            stray or nuisance dogs, and transports captured
                                                                                                                    8
Veterinary assistant                                         animals to kennels.



                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   213
Major Group 6


                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Canine beautician
                Dog warden
                Groom
                Kennel maid
                Zoo keeper




  1


  2


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                214     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                      Major Group 6
                     SUB-MAJOR GROUP 62
            LEISURE AND OTHER PERSONAL SERVICE
                        OCCUPATIONS
Workers within Leisure and Other Personal Service Occupations provide services and
equipment for sporting and recreational activities, make travel arrangements for clients,
provide ancillary services for travellers, provide hairdressing and beauty services, undertake
domestic and care-taking duties in private households, public buildings and other
establishments, provide funeral services and control pests hazardous to public health.
                                                                                                                       1
                          MINOR GROUP 621
              LEISURE AND TRAVEL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
Workers in leisure and travel service occupations organise and maintain services and
equipment necessary for sporting and recreational activities, advise upon and make travel                              2
arrangements for customers and provide services to enhance the enjoyment, comfort and
safety of holidaymakers and air, rail, and sea passengers.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
                                                                                                                       3
       6211    SPORTS AND LEISURE ASSISTANTS
       6212    TRAVEL AGENTS
       6213    TRAVEL AND TOUR GUIDES
       6214    AIR TRAVEL ASSISTANTS                                                                                   4
       6215    RAIL TRAVEL ASSISTANTS
       6219    LEISURE AND TRAVEL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS NEC

                                                                                                                       5
6211 SPORTS AND LEISURE                                    TASKS
     ASSISTANTS
                                                           • assesses likely outcome of event and establishes
Sports and leisure assistants offer odds and accept             odds, accepts and records bets, issues receipts
bets on the result of sporting and other events, control        and pays out on winning bets;
gambling activities, provide and maintain facilities
                                                                                                                       6
for sporting and recreational activities and supervises    • controls the progress of games of cards, roulette
its use, and maintain the continuity of entertainment           and other gambling activities according to
and social events.                                              established rules;

                                                           • maintains sports and leisure equipment and
                                                                prepares equipment for use;                            7
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                  • supervises the use of swimming pools,
                                                                gymnasium apparatus, fitness machines and other
There are no formal academic entry requirements,                recreational equipment;
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades. A variety of vocational qualifications are         • maintains hygienic operation of swimming pools            8
available in Sports and Recreation and Leisure and              and associated facilities such as jacuzzis, showers
Tourism.                                                        and changing areas;


                                                                                                                       9

                                                           Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   215
                • carries clubs for golfers, advises on the layout
Major Group 6


                                                                              Travel agency clerk
                   and distance of golf courses and appropriate               Travel agent
                   choice of golf club;                                       Travel sales executive
                • announces acts, makes introductions, proposes
                   toasts and maintains the continuity of
                   entertainment events and social functions.
                                                                              6213 TRAVEL AND TOUR GUIDES

                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            Travel and tour guides ensure that travel
                                                                              arrangements made for clients run smoothly and
                Croupier                                                      provide a range of services to enhance the enjoyment,
                Lifeguard                                                     comfort and safety of passengers.
  1             Recreation assistant
                Turf accountant
                Wardrobe mistress                                             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

  2             6212 TRAVEL AGENTS                                            Academic qualifications may be required by some
                                                                              employers. Spoken fluency in a foreign language is
                Travel agents advise travellers upon travel                   essential for some posts. NVQs/SVQs in Travel
                arrangements, make bookings and receive payment
                                                                              Services are available at Levels 2 and 3.
                for travel arrangements made.

  3
                                                                              TASKS
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              • receives passengers, checks tickets and conducts
                                                                                 them to their seats;
                There are no formal academic entry requirements,
  4             although many employers require entrants to possess
                GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically received on-
                                                                              • makes announcements to passengers regarding
                                                                                 the details of travel arrangements and deals with
                the-job. NVQs/SVQs in Travel Services are
                                                                                 any queries;
                available at Levels 2 and 3.
                                                                              • assists with the booking and transfer of luggage
                                                                                 and other items;
  5             TASKS
                                                                              • comments on places of interest during the
                • discusses client requirements and shows                        journey;
                   brochures containing suitable packages;
                                                                              • makes local arrangements for food and
                • establishes availability with tour operators and               accommodation at stop over points;
  6                makes bookings;
                                                                              • responds to enquiries and complaints, makes
                • consults travel time tables, books travel tickets              arrangements and takes bookings for excursions
                   and accommodation;
                                                                                 and other entertainment, and provides assistance
                • handles cash, debit and credit card payment;                   and advice to holidaymakers.

  7             • advises on issues of currency, passports, visa
                   requirements, insurance, car hire and health
                   precautions required.                                      RELATED JOB TITLES

                                                                              Coach guide
                                                                              Courier (tour operator)
  8             RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              Escort
                Booking clerk (travel agents)                                 Guide
                Reservations clerk (travel)                                   Representative (tour operator)


  9

                216      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                      Major Group 6
6214 AIR TRAVEL ASSISTANTS                                 with the arrival and departure of trains and the
                                                           movement of goods and passengers.
Air travel assistants issue travel tickets and boarding
passes, examines other documentation, provide
information and assistance at airport terminals and
look after the welfare, comfort and safety of              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
passengers travelling in aircraft.                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                                                           There are no formal academic entry requirements,
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                   although entrants are required to take a medical
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                  examination and have normal colour vision.
                                                           Training is provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/
Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades. Fluency           SVQs in Rail Transport (Passenger) are available
in a foreign language may also be required in some         at Level 2.                                                 1
posts. Training typically lasts between 3 to 6 weeks
followed by a 6 to 12 month probationary period of
on-the-job training.                                       TASKS


TASKS
                                                           • examines and collects tickets at the ticket barrier
                                                                of a railway station;
                                                                                                                       2
• receives passengers at airport terminal, examines        • helps with passenger enquiries and makes
   tickets and other documentation, checks in                   announcements over a public address system at
   luggage and distributes boarding passes;                     stations;
• checks emergency equipment, distributes reading          • loads and unloads mail, goods and luggage,
                                                                                                                       3
   material, blankets and other items, and ensures              operates lifts and hoists and drives small trucks;
   that the aircraft is ready for the receipt of
   passengers;                                             • assists passengers with special needs to board
                                                                and leave trains;
• welcomes passengers on board the aircraft,
   conducts them to their seat and assists with            • checks control panel operation before start of
                                                                                                                       4
   any hand luggage, ensures that sufficient                    journey, operates train door controls and signals
   stocks of meals and beverages are on board                   to driver to start or stop train;
   the aircraft prior to take off and serves
   passengers during the flight;                           • inspects and issues tickets on trains, deals with
• makes announcements on behalf of the pilot,                   passenger enquiries, and takes charge of goods         5
                                                                being transported on train.
   demonstrates the use of emergency equipment
   and checks that safety belts are fastened.

                                                           RELATED JOB TITLES
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                           Conductor (railways)
                                                                                                                       6
Air hostess                                                Revenue protection officer (railways)
Air steward/stewardess                                     Ticket collector (railways)
Aircraft purser                                            Train guard
Cabin attendant
Passenger services agent                                                                                               7
                                                           6219 LEISURE AND TRAVEL
6215 RAIL TRAVEL ASSISTANTS                                     SERVICE OCCUPATIONS NEC
Rail travel assistants issue, collect and inspect travel   Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
tickets, provide information and assistance to railway     leisure and travel service occupations not elsewhere        8
passengers, operate train doors, and perform a             classified in MINOR GROUP 621: Leisure and
variety of duties on station platforms in connection       Travel Service Occupations.



                                                                                                                       9

                                                           Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   217
Major Group 6


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                Training is received on-the-job. Vocational
                qualifications are available in some areas.



                TASKS

                • observes regulations concerning the carrying
                   capacity of vehicles and controls the boarding
  1                of passengers accordingly;

                • signals to driver when to stop and start bus,
                   collects fares from passengers and issues
                   tickets and changes destination indicators as
                   necessary;
  2             • completes way-bill at scheduled points on route
                   and balances cash taken with tickets issued;

                • receives passengers on ship, examines tickets and
                   other documentation, directs them to their cabin
  3                and assists with any luggage;

                • makes announcements to passengers and deals
                   with enquiries;

                • serves food and beverages to passengers.
  4
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Bus conductor
                Ship's steward
  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                218      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                     Major Group 6
                         MINOR GROUP 622
               HAIRDRESSERS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
Hairdressers and related occupations cut, style and treat hair, apply cosmetics and give
facial and body beauty treatments.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       6221 HAIRDRESSERS, BARBERS
       6222 BEAUTICIANS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
                                                                                                                      1
6221 HAIRDRESSERS, BARBERS                                6222 BEAUTICIANS AND RELATED
                                                               OCCUPATIONS
Hairdressers and barbers shampoo, cut, style and
treat hair.                                               Beauticians and related workers give facial and body
                                                          beauty treatments, apply cosmetics and dress wigs.
                                                                                                                      2
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                 TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                          ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic requirements for                                                                        3
entry, although some colleges require candidates to       There are no minimum academic requirements for
possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is provided off-         entry, although some colleges require candidates to
                                                          possess GCSEs/S grades. NVQs/SVQs in Beauty
and on-the-job and lasts upto three years leading to
                                                          Therapy are available at Levels 1, 2 and 3.
the awarding of NVQs/SVQs at Levels 1, 2 and 3.
                                                          Professional qualifications are also available.
Modern Apprenticeships leading to an NVQ/SVQ
at Level 3 are also available.
                                                                                                                      4
                                                          TASKS

TASKS                                                     • discusses clients requirements, advises client on
                                                               skin care and applies creams or lotions to the
• discusses customer requirements and cuts and                 face or body;                                          5
   trims hair using scissors, clippers, razor and comb;
                                                          • massages scalp, face and other parts of the body;
• washes, bleaches, tints, dyes or waves hair and         • uses waxing, sugaring and epilation techniques
   provides any necessary scalp treatments;                    to remove any unwanted bodily hair;
• combs, brushes, blow-dries or sets wet hair in          • cleans, shapes and polishes finger and/or toe nails;      6
   rollers to style or straighten;
                                                          • applies make-up to hide blemishes or emphasise
• shaves and trims beards and moustaches;                      facial features;

• collects payment, arranges appointments and             • advises clients on diet and exercise to assist in
   cleans and tidies salon.                                    weight loss and slimming.                              7

                                                          RELATED JOB TITLES
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                          Beautician
Barber                                                    Make-up artist                                              8
Hair stylist                                              Manicurist
Hairdresser                                               Slimming consultant


                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   219
Major Group 6



                                                MINOR GROUP 623
                                           HOUSEKEEPING OCCUPATIONS
                Domestic staff and related occupations workers supervise, co-ordinate and undertake
                domestic tasks in private households, hotels, schools, hostels and other residential
                establishments, take care of schools, churches, offices, flats and other buildings.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                      6231 HOUSEKEEPERS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
  1                   6232 CARETAKERS


                6231 HOUSEKEEPERS AND                                        RELATED JOB TITLES
                     RELATED OCCUPATIONS
                                                                             Butler
  2             Housekeepers and related workers supervise and               Cook-housekeeper
                perform domestic cleaning and other housekeeping             Housekeeper
                tasks within private households, hotels, schools,            Valet
                hostels and other non-private households.

  3                                                                          6232 CARETAKERS
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                    Caretakers supervise and undertake the care and
                                                                             maintenance of church, school, office and other
                There are no formal academic entry requirements,             buildings and furnishings.
  4             although entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades
                or an equivalent qualification. NVQs/SVQs in
                Catering and Hospitality (Housekeeping) at Level 2           TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                and Accommodation Supervision at Level 3 are                 ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                available. Modern Apprenticeships at NVQ/SVQ
                Level 3 are also available.                                  No academic qualifications are required. Training
  5                                                                          is provided.

                TASKS
                                                                             TASKS
                • controls the purchase and storing of food,
  6                cleaning materials and other household supplies;          • locks and unlocks doors and entrances at
                                                                                appropriate times;
                • maintains household records;
                                                                             • supervises and/or undertakes the cleaning and
                • supervises the activities of cleaners and other               maintenance of premises;
                   housekeeping staff and inspects work undertaken;
  7                                                                          • controls heating, lighting and security systems;
                • performs a variety of domestic tasks including
                   food preparation and service, cleaning, washing           • undertakes minor repairs and notifies owner of
                   and ironing;                                                 need for major repairs;
                • assists employer in washing, dressing, packing             • checks fire and safety equipment for adequate
                   and other personal activities.                               functioning.
  8


  9

                220     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                Major Group 6
RELATED JOB TITLES

Caretaker
Janitor
School caretaker




                                                                                 1


                                                                                 2


                                                                                 3


                                                                                 4


                                                                                 5


                                                                                 6


                                                                                 7


                                                                                 8


                                                                                 9

                     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   221
Major Group 6



                                           MINOR GROUP 629
                                  PERSONAL SERVICES OCCUPATIONS NEC
                Workers in this minor group make funeral arrangements for clients, prepare bodies for
                burial or cremation, assist the proceedings of funerals, and investigate and destroy pests
                hazardous to public health.


                       6291 UNDERTAKERS AND MORTUARY ASSISTANTS
                       6292 PEST CONTROL OFFICERS
  1
                6291 UNDERTAKERS AND                                          RELATED JOB TITLES
                     MORTUARY ASSISTANTS
                                                                              Bearer (funeral directors)
                Undertakers and mortuary assistants make funeral              Embalmer
  2             arrangements for clients, prepare the deceased for            Funeral director
                burial or cremation, and supervise and assist the             Undertaker
                proceedings of funerals.

                                                                              6292 PEST CONTROL OFFICERS
  3             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              Pest control officers investigate the presence of pests
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              that are hazardous to public health or cause nuisance,
                There are no formal academic requirements although            lay traps to capture pests and treat areas of
                some employers require candidates to possess                  infestation.
                GCSEs/S grades. A full driving licence is often
  4             required. Training is provided on-the-job.
                Professional qualifications in funeral directing and          TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                embalming are available.                                      ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                                                                              There are no formal academic entry qualifications,
  5             TASKS                                                         though some employers may expect entrants to
                                                                              possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is provided on-
                • collects body of deceased and assists with the              the-job, supplemented by specialist courses covering
                   completion of necessary documents;                         different aspects of pest control.

                • interviews relative or representative of the
  6                deceased to discuss preparations for funeral;              TASKS
                • liaises with cemetery or crematorium authorities            • receives reports from public, property owners
                   on behalf of client;                                          and authorities regarding the presence of pests
                                                                                 and infestations;
                • washes and injects body with sterilising fluid to
  7                prevent deterioration prior to funeral, and applies        • visits sites to investigate the presence of rodents,
                   cosmetics, wax and other materials to restore                 infestations and other pests that may be
                   normal appearance;                                            hazardous to public health;
                • provides hearse and funeral cars and leads funeral          • lays traps to capture pests, and fumigates and
                   procession;                                                   disinfects areas to remove infestations;
  8
                • controls the operations of crematoriums and                 • advises property owners on courses of action to
                   cemeteries and processes legal documentation.                 prevent the return of pests;



  9

                222      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• liaises with environmental health officers,




                                                                                                                  Major Group 6
   housing officers and other relevant authorities
   where measures on a large scale are required to
   remove pests;

• returns to sites to examine contents of traps laid
   and the continued presence of reported pests;

• treats wood for effects of termites, woodworm
   and other infestations of timber.



RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                   1
Pest control officer
Pest controller


                                                                                                                   2


                                                                                                                   3


                                                                                                                   4


                                                                                                                   5


                                                                                                                   6


                                                                                                                   7


                                                                                                                   8


                                                                                                                   9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   223
                                                                                                           Major Group 7
                         MAJOR GROUP 7
                  SALES AND CUSTOMER SERVICE
                          OCCUPATIONS
This major group covers occupations whose tasks require the knowledge and experience
necessary to sell goods and services, accept payment in respect of sales, replenish stocks of
goods in stores, provide information to potential clients and additional services to customers
after the point of sale. The main tasks involve a knowledge of sales techniques, a degree of
knowledge regarding the product or service being sold, familiarity with cash and credit
handling procedures and a certain amount of record keeping associated with those tasks.
                                                                                                            1
Most occupations in this major group require a general education and skills in interpersonal
communication. Some occupations will require a degree of specific knowledge regarding
the product or service being sold, but are included in this major group because the primary
task involves selling.                                                                                      2
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:

71 SALES OCCUPATIONS                                                                                        3
    711    SALES ASSISTANTS AND RETAIL CASHIERS
    712    SALES RELATED OCCUPATIONS
                                                                                                            4
72 CUSTOMER SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
    721    CUSTOMER SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

                                                                                                            5


                                                                                                            6


                                                                                                            7


                                                                                                            8


                                                                                                            9

                                                Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   225
Major Group 7



                                                  SUB-MAJOR GROUP 71
                                                  SALES OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this sub-major group sell goods and services in retail and wholesale
                establishments, accept payment in respect of sales, obtain orders and collect payments for
                goods and services from private households, replenish stocks of goods in stores, create
                displays of merchandise and perform other sales related occupations.


                                           MINOR GROUP 711
  1                             SALES ASSISTANTS AND RETAIL CASHIERS
                Sales assistants and retail cashiers sell goods and services in retail or wholesale
                establishments, accept payments and give change in respect of sales, and obtain, receive
                and record telephone orders for goods and services.
  2             Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                      7111 SALES AND RETAIL ASSISTANTS
                      7112 RETAIL CASHIERS AND CHECK-OUT OPERATORS
  3                   7113 TELEPHONE SALESPERSONS


                7111 SALES AND RETAIL                                        • receives full or partial payment, writes bill,
                     ASSISTANTS                                                 receipt or docket and packages merchandise for
  4                                                                             customer;
                Sales and retail assistants demonstrate and sell a
                variety of goods and services in shops, showrooms            • arranges goods on display stands, undertakes
                and similar establishments.                                     stock checks and assists with the receipt of
                                                                                deliveries from suppliers into the stock room;
  5             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                     • handles returns and deals with customer
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                       complaints.

                No minimum academic qualifications are required
                although some employers may require GCSEs/S
  6             grades. Training is typically provided on-the-job.
                                                                             RELATED JOB TITLES
                Modern Apprenticeships at NVQ/SVQ Level 3 and
                                                                             Counter assistant
                National Traineeships at NVQ Level 2 may be
                                                                             Retail assistant
                available. NVQs/SVQs in Retail Operations are
                                                                             Sales assistant
                available at Levels 1 and 2.
                                                                             Shop assistant
  7
                TASKS
                                                                             7112 RETAIL CASHIERS AND
                • discusses customer requirements, including type
                   and price range of goods/services desired;                     CHECK-OUT OPERATORS
  8             • advises customer on selection, purchase, use and           Retail cashiers and check-out operators accept
                   care of merchandise and quotes prices, discounts          payments from customers and give change in respect
                   and delivery times;                                       of sales or services.



  9

                226     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 7
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                TASKS
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                        • assesses the characteristics of product/service
There are no minimum academic requirements                   being sold and decides on its main selling points;
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades or relevant experience. Training is typically    • telephones potential customers, explains purpose
                                                             of call, discusses their requirements and advises
provided on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in Retail
                                                             on the goods/services being offered;
Operations are available at Levels 1 and 2.
                                                        • quotes prices, credit terms and delivery
                                                             conditions and records details of orders agreed;
TASKS                                                   • receives orders for goods/services by telephone
• records cost of each item on cash register or by
                                                             and records relevant details;                          1
   use of bar code reader and totals the amount to      • stays abreast of advances in product/services
   be paid;                                                  field.

• receives cash, cheque or credit card payment,
   gives change and issues receipts for purchase;
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES                                          2
• debits customer's account in respect of purchases
   or services;                                         Telephone canvasser
                                                        Telephone salesperson
• monitors fuel taken by self-service customers or
   refuels vehicle if required;
                                                                                                                    3
• reconciles takings with receipts and till rolls and
   maintains other transaction records as requested.



RELATED JOB TITLES                                                                                                  4
Cashier (retail trade)
Check-out operator
Forecourt attendant
Petrol pump attendant                                                                                               5
Restaurant cashier



7113 TELEPHONE SALESPERSONS
                                                                                                                    6
Telephone salespersons obtain, receive and record
telephone orders for goods and services.



TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                                                                            7
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Academic qualifications may be required. Training
is typically received on-the-job, supplemented by
short courses in practical skills. NVQs/SVQs in
Selling are available at Levels 2 and 3.
                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   227
Major Group 7



                                                 MINOR GROUP 712
                                            SALES RELATED OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this minor group visit private households to obtain orders and collect payments,
                deliver and sell food, drink and other goods in streets and open spaces from portable
                containers, stalls and vans, collect and deliver laundered and similarly serviced articles,
                replenish and display stocks of merchandise, and undertake a variety of sales occupations
                not elsewhere classified in MINOR GROUP 712: Sales Related Occupations.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

  1                    7121    COLLECTOR SALESPERSONS AND CREDIT AGENTS
                       7122    DEBT, RENT AND OTHER CASH COLLECTORS
                       7123    ROUNDSMEN/WOMEN AND VAN SALESPERSONS
                       7124    MARKET AND STREET TRADERS AND ASSISTANTS
  2                    7125    MERCHANDISERS AND WINDOW DRESSERS
                       7129    SALES RELATED OCCUPATIONS NEC


  3             7121 COLLECTOR SALESPERSONS                                   RELATED JOB TITLES
                     AND CREDIT AGENTS                                        Canvasser
                Collector salespersons and credit agents visit private        Collector-salesperson
                households to obtain orders and collect payments              Credit agent
                                                                              Door-to-door salesman/woman
  4             for goods and services.
                                                                              Insurance agent

                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     7122 DEBT, RENT AND OTHER
  5             No academic qualifications are required. Training
                                                                                   CASH COLLECTORS
                is provided on-the-job and may be supplemented by             Debt, rent and other cash collectors collect payments
                specialist short courses provided by employers.               due or overdue from households and businesses and
                                                                              empty cash from prepayment meters or machines.

  6             TASKS
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                • calls on household, explains purpose of call and
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                   displays or describes goods/services on offer;

                • emphasises main selling point of goods/services             No academic qualifications are required. Training
                                                                              is typically provided on-the-job. This may be
  7                to stimulate customer interest;
                                                                              supplemented by specialised training courses within
                • quotes prices and terms, collects any payments              larger agencies.
                   and completes hire purchase or credit
                   arrangements;

                • distributes advertising literature and sample               TASKS
  8                goods;
                                                                              • receives payment at centralised office or calls
                • makes follow up calls to obtain further orders.                on household/business premises;



  9

                228      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• records details of transaction, issues receipt or      • calls out, rings bell or otherwise attracts attention




                                                                                                                    Major Group 7
   annotates rent book;                                       to the items on sale;

• reads gas, water and electricity meters;               • sells goods, records deliveries, takes further
                                                              orders or articles requiring servicing and collects
• cleans, services and fills vending machines and             cash or prepares bill;
   collects money from meters, vending machines
   and other cash operated machinery;                    • returns to depot and hands in unsold goods and
                                                              cash.
• collects tolls from persons wishing to gain access
   to private roads, bridges, piers, etc. and operates
   tollgates to control entry;
                                                         RELATED JOB TITLES
• remits cash, cheques or credit notes to cashier,
   supervisor or bank, building society or post          Driver-salesman/woman
                                                                                                                     1
   office.                                               Ice-cream salesman/woman
                                                         Milkman/woman (milk retailing)
                                                         Roundsman/woman
RELATED JOB TITLES                                       Van salesman/woman
                                                                                                                     2
Collector-agent
Debt collector
Meter reader                                             7124 MARKET AND STREET
Rent collector                                                TRADERS AND ASSISTANTS
Vending machine operator
                                                         Market and street traders and assistants sell goods         3
                                                         (other than refreshments) from stalls, barrows and
                                                         other portable containers in streets and market places.
7123 ROUNDSMEN/WOMEN AND
     VAN SALESPERSONS
Roundsmen/women and van salespersons deliver             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                    4
and sell food, drink and other goods by calling on       ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
householders or by selling from a mobile shop or
van and call on households to collect and receive        No academic qualifications are required.
payment for laundered or similarly serviced articles.
                                                                                                                     5
                                                         TASKS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                         • displays products on stall or barrow;
                                                         • calls out to attract attention to goods on offer;
No academic qualifications are required but
candidates should hold a clean driving licence. Off-     • sells goods at fixed price or by bargaining with          6
and on-the-job training is provided.                          customer;

                                                         • accepts payment and may wrap goods;
TASKS                                                    • cleans up site on completion of each day's trading.
                                                                                                                     7
• loads vehicle with food, drink or articles that have
   been laundered, etc.;
                                                         RELATED JOB TITLES
• drives vehicle over established route and parks
   at recognised stopping places or households;          Market assistant
                                                         Market trader                                               8
• calls at customers' premises and delivers ordered      Stall holder
   goods;                                                Street trader



                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   229
Major Group 7



                7125 MERCHANDISERS AND                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                     WINDOW DRESSERS                                          ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Merchandisers and window dressers replenish stocks            There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                of goods in stores, advise retailers on the optimum           Training is typically received on-the-job, supplemented
                display of merchandise and create displays of                 by short courses covering practical skills and details
                merchandise in shop windows.                                  of the product or service being sold. NVQs/SVQs in
                                                                              Selling are available at Levels 2 and 3.


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     TASKS

  1             Entrants typically possess a professional qualification       • assesses characteristics of goods/services being
                from the British Design Society, or an approved                  sold and decides on main selling points;
                vocational qualification. Candidates usually require          • advises vendors and purchasers on market prices
                GCSEs/S grades.          NVQs/SVQs in Visual                     of property, accompanies clients to view property
                Merchandising are available at Levels 1 and 2.                   and assists with purchasing arrangements;
  2                                                                           • advises clients and agents on insurance related
                                                                                 problems, seeks new outlets for business and
                TASKS                                                            quotes premiums, bonus rates, tax concessions,
                                                                                 etc.;
                • monitors stock movements, considers customer
  3                requirements and assists customers in completing
                   orders;
                                                                              • obtains orders for advertising, financial, catering,
                                                                                 printing and transportation services;
                • supplies information about the product to the               • organises parties in private households to sell
                   retailer and sales staff and deals with customer              clothing, fashion accessories, giftware and other
                   enquiries;                                                    goods;
  4             • advises retailers on the optimal display of a               • provides demonstrations of a product within
                   product and of any promotions;                                retail stores, exhibitions and trade fairs to
                                                                                 promote interest amongst potential customers;
                • dismantles existing displays, returns merchandise
                   to relevant departments and prepares area for new          • negotiates agreements for the passage of supply
                   display;
  5                                                                              lines over or under land/property and the siting
                                                                                 of supporting structures and other items.
                • arranges clothes, accessories, furnishings etc.
                   according to plan or own design.

                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES

  6             RELATED JOB TITLES                                            Advertising representative
                                                                              Demonstrator
                Display assistant (retail trade)                              Negotiator (estate agents)
                Merchandiser                                                  Sales representative (retail trade)
                Window dresser                                                Wayleave officer
  7
                7129 SALES RELATED
                     OCCUPATIONS NEC
                Workers in this unit group perform a variety of sales
  8             occupations not elsewhere classified in MINOR
                GROUP 712: Sales Related Occupations.




  9

                230      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 7
                      SUB-MAJOR GROUP 72
                 CUSTOMER SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
Customer service occupations receive and respond to enquiries regarding products or
services, deal with customer complaints and perform a variety of tasks in the provision of
additional services to customers after the point of sale.


                            MINOR GROUP 721
                      CUSTOMER SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group receive and respond to telephone and other enquiries regarding
                                                                                                                    1
the products and services offered by an organisation, deal with customer complaints, and
provide further services to customers after the point of sale.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
                                                                                                                    2
       7211 CALL CENTRE AGENTS/OPERATORS
       7212 CUSTOMER CARE OCCUPATIONS

                                                                                                                    3
7211 CALL CENTRE AGENTS/                               • maintains details of calls received, the action
     OPERATORS                                              taken as a result of a call and updates customer
                                                            records as required;
Call centre agents and operators receive telephone
                                                       • arranges for field staff to visit the caller if further
calls from potential clients and existing customers
regarding the products and services offered by an           assistance is required.
                                                                                                                    4
organisation.

                                                       RELATED JOB TITLES
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                              Answer line operator                                         5
                                                       Sales order clerk
There are no formal academic entry requirements,       Telephone adviser
although many employers expect candidates to
possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically
provided on-the-job, supplemented by specialist
short courses.                                         7212 CUSTOMER CARE                                           6
                                                            OCCUPATIONS

TASKS                                                  Workers in this unit group provide information to
                                                       existing and potential clients regarding the products
• answers incoming telephone calls from existing
   or prospective customers;
                                                       and services offered by an organisation, and further
                                                       services to customers after the point of sale.
                                                                                                                    7
• interviews caller to establish the nature of any
   complaint or the requirements of the client;
                                                       TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
• informs existing and potential customers on any      ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
   immediate action to be taken, advises on services
                                                                                                                    8
   available and sells additional products or          There are no formal academic entry requirements,
   services;                                           although many employers expect candidates to



                                                                                                                    9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   231
Major Group 7


                possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically
                provided on-the-job, supplemented by specialist
                short courses.



                TASKS

                • receives enquiries from potential and existing
                   clients, discusses requirements, and recommends
                   products or services;

                • discusses pricing processes with clients, agrees
  1                payment arrangements and handles customer
                   accounts;

                • follows up clients to ensure their satisfaction with
                   a product or service and to gain renewal of
                   customer service agreements;
  2             • addresses customer complaints and problems;
                • informs customers of special promotions and new
                   product launches.


  3
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Commercial officer (telecommunications)
                Customer care adviser
                Customer liaison officer
  4             Customer services assistant




  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                232      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                            Major Group 8
                   MAJOR GROUP 8
       PROCESS, PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES
This major group covers occupations whose main tasks require the knowledge and
experience necessary to operate and monitor industrial plant and equipment; to assemble
products from component parts according to strict rules and procedures and to subject
assembled parts to routine tests; and to drive and assist in the operation of various transport
vehicles and other mobile machinery.


Most occupations in this major group do not specify that a particular standard of education                  1
should have been achieved but will usually have an associated period of formal experience-
related training. Some occupations require licences issued by statutory or professional
bodies.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:
                                                                                                             2

81 PROCESS, PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES
    811    PROCESS OPERATIVES                                                                                3
    812    PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES
    813    ASSEMBLERS AND ROUTINE OPERATIVES
    814    CONSTRUCTION OPERATIVES
                                                                                                             4
82 TRANSPORT AND MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS AND
   OPERATIVES
    821    TRANSPORT DRIVERS AND OPERATIVES
    822    MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS AND OPERATIVES                                                             5


                                                                                                             6


                                                                                                             7


                                                                                                             8


                                                                                                             9

                                                 Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   233
Major Group 8



                                  SUB-MAJOR GROUP 81
                        PROCESS, PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES
                Process, plant and machine operatives operate and attend machinery to manufacture,
                process or otherwise treat foodstuffs, beverages, textiles, chemicals, glass, ceramics,
                rubber, plastic, metal, synthetic and other products, operate plant and machinery to
                produce paper, wood and related products, extract coal and other minerals from the
                earth, attend and operate power generation and water treatment systems, perform routine
                operations in the manufacture of motor vehicles, metal goods, electrical products,
                clothing and other goods, and perform a variety of tasks in relation to the construction
  1             and repair of buildings, public highways, underground piping systems, railway tracks
                and other structures.


                                                       MINOR GROUP 811
  2                                                  PROCESS OPERATIVES
                Process operatives set, operate and attend machinery to bake, freeze, heat, crush, mix,
                blend and otherwise process foodstuffs, beverages and tobacco leaves, prepare natural and
                synthetic fibres for processing, spin and twist fibre into yarn, thread, twine, rope and other
  3             similar material, prepare colouring matter required for printing or dyeing fabrics, and produce
                or otherwise treat chemical, glass, ceramics, rubber, plastic, metal, synthetic and other
                products.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
  4
                       8111    FOOD, DRINK AND TOBACCO PROCESS OPERATIVES
                       8112    GLASS AND CERAMICS PROCESS OPERATIVES
                       8113    TEXTILE PROCESS OPERATIVES
  5                    8114    CHEMICAL AND RELATED PROCESS OPERATIVES
                       8115    RUBBER PROCESS OPERATIVES
                       8116    PLASTICS PROCESS OPERATIVES
                       8117    METAL MAKING AND TREATING PROCESS OPERATIVES
  6                    8118    ELECTROPLATERS
                       8119    PROCESS OPERATIVES NEC


  7             8111 FOOD, DRINK AND TOBACCO                                  TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                     PROCESS OPERATIVES
                Food, drink and tobacco process operatives set,               There are no formal academic entry requirements,
                operate and attend machinery to bake, freeze, heat,           though some GCSEs/S grades can be an advantage.
                crush, mix, blend and otherwise process foodstuffs,           Off- and on-the-job training is available. NVQs/
  8             beverages and tobacco leaves.                                 SVQs in Food and Drink Manufacturing Operations
                                                                              are available at Levels 1, 2 and 3. NVQs/SVQs in
                                                                              Tobacco Processing are available at Level 2.



  9

                234      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                      Major Group 8
TASKS                                                     TASKS

• sets, operates and attends machinery and ovens          • directs loading of furnace with prescribed
   to mix, bake and otherwise prepare bread and                quantities and types of ingredients;
   flour confectionery products;
                                                          • sets timing and temperature controls, monitors
• operates machinery to crush, mix, malt, cook                 pressure gauges, adjusts controls as necessary
   and ferment grains and fruits to produce beer,              and regulates level of glass in furnace as required;
   wines, malt liquors, vinegar, yeast and related
   products;                                              • operates controls to rotate rotary furnaces and
                                                               create a vacuum in vacuum furnaces, ensures that
• attends equipment to make jam, toffee, cheese,               static furnaces are correctly positioned and
   processed cheese, margarine, syrup, ice, pasta,             switches on current;
   ice-cream, sausages, chocolate, maize starch,
                                                          • monitors temperature of drying and annealing
                                                                                                                       1
   edible fats and dextrin;
                                                               kilns and reports any significant deviations from
• operates equipment to cool, heat, dry, roast,                schedule sheet;
   blanch, pasteurise, smoke, sterilise, freeze,
   evaporate and concentrate foodstuffs and liquids       • cuts off heat supply after firing/ heating/drying
   used in food processing;                                    and cleans furnace and kiln areas.                      2
• mixes, pulps, grinds, blends and separates
   foodstuffs and liquids with churning, pressing,        RELATED JOB TITLES
   sieving, grinding and filtering equipment;
                                                          Glass furnace operator
• processes tobacco leaves by hand or machine to
                                                          Kiln burner (glass, ceramics mfr)
                                                                                                                       3
   make cigarettes, cigars, pipe and other tobacco
   products.                                              Kiln placer
                                                          Kiln setter


RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                       4
                                                          8113 TEXTILE PROCESS
Bakery assistant
                                                               OPERATIVES
Brewery worker
Dairy worker                                              Workers in this unit group operate machines to
Process worker (food products mfr)                        prepare natural and synthetic fibres for processing,
                                                          spin and twist fibre into yarn, thread, twine, rope          5
                                                          and other similar material, and estimate the quantities
8112 GLASS AND CERAMICS                                   of colouring matter required for printing and dyeing
                                                          fabrics.
     PROCESS OPERATIVES
Workers in this unit group position articles ready
for firing in kilns and operate and attend furnaces
                                                                                                                       6
                                                          TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTS AND
and kilns to make and treat glass and ceramic articles.   ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                                                          There are no formal academic entry requirements.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                  Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                 SVQs in Manufacturing Textiles are available at              7
                                                          Levels 1, 2 and 3.
Academic qualifications are not normally required.
Training is mostly on-the-job, the amount and extent
depending on the equipment used and type of               TASKS
operations performed. NVQs/SVQs covering glass                                                                         8
processing, kiln operations and manufacturing             • sets controls, starts machinery and monitors the
ceramic items are available at Levels 1 and 2.                 passage of material processed;



                                                                                                                       9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   235
                • replenishes the supply of input fibres, removes
Major Group 8


                                                                              TASKS
                   and replaces full output packages, cards and
                   spools;                                                    • loads prescribed quantities of ingredients into
                                                                                 plant equipment, starts operational cycle,
                • detects blockages, tangled thread, defective or                monitors instruments and gauges indicating
                   broken material, and joins broken ends by hand                conditions affecting the operation of the plant
                   or mechanical knotting;
                                                                                 and adjusts controls as necessary;
                • checks quality of completed material, marks any             • prepares dye, bleaching, water repellent, fixing
                   flaws and removes badly damaged sections;
                                                                                 salt and other chemical solutions to finish and
                • examines colour cards or specifications,                       treat textiles;
                   estimates quantity of colouring material needed
                                                                              • regulates input of polymer into melting unit,
  1                to print or dye fibre and calculates and mixes
                                                                                 extrudes polymer, gathers extruded filaments and
                   ingredients accordingly;
                                                                                 feeds strands through rolling, cutting and
                • stretches, shrinks, brushes, dampens and presses               treatment units to produce synthetic fibre;
                   fabric and shears or burns off protruding fabric
                   fibres as required;                                        • operates kilns, furnaces and ovens to produce
  2             • cleans and oils machine, detects and reports
                                                                                 charcoal, coke and other carbon products;

                   mechanical faults to technicians.                          • operates machines to coat film and tape with
                                                                                 sensitising material and otherwise impregnate
                                                                                 materials by immersion, split and mould mica
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                               and produce asbestos pipes and sheets;
  3                                                                           • cuts and trims skins, hides and pelts, removes
                Creeler
                                                                                 wool, hair, flesh and other waste material, and
                Spinner (textile mfr)
                                                                                 washes, limes, tans, dyes and otherwise treats
                Stenter operator
                                                                                 hides for making into leather, skin and fur
                Winder (textile mfr)
                                                                                 products;
  4
                                                                              • withdraws samples for quality control testing,
                                                                                 removes and regulates discharge of batch
                8114 CHEMICAL AND RELATED                                        material upon completion of processing.
                     PROCESS OPERATIVES
  5             Workers in this unit group operate plant and
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                machinery in the processing of chemical and
                related materials by chemical, heat or other
                treatment, manufacture synthetic materials and                Colour mixer
                bleach, dye or otherwise treat textiles, and treat            Dye house operative (textile mfr)
                hides, skins and pelts for making into fur, leather           Nylon spinner
  6             and skin products.                                            Paint maker
                                                                              Process worker (chemical mfr)


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  7                                                                           8115 RUBBER PROCESS
                There are no formal academic entry requirements,                   OPERATIVES
                although some employers require entrants to possess
                GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically received on-            Workers in this unit group attend and operate
                the-job, supplemented by specialised training                 masticating, calendering, mixing, forming, shaping,
                courses. NVQs/SVQs in Process Operations are                  moulding, extruding, cutting, trimming and winding
  8             available at Levels 1, 2 and 3.                               machines to make and repair rubber products.




  9

                236      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 8
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                               ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic entry requirements,        There are no formal academic entry requirements.
although some employers require entrants to possess     Training is typically provided on-the-job,
GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically on-the-job,       supplemented by specialised courses. NVQs/SVQs
supplemented by specialised training courses.           in Plastic Processing Operations are available at
NVQs/SVQs in Processing Rubber are available at         Levels 1 and 2. Modern Apprenticeships in Polymer
Levels 1 and 2.                                         Processing leading to an NVQ/SVQ at Level 3 are
                                                        available.

TASKS
                                                        TASKS                                                       1
• ascertains ingredients and mixing requirements,
   feeds machine or regulates flow from feed            • prepares machine for operation by affixing any
   conveyors and hoppers;                                    necessary attachments;

• regulates speed, temperature and pressure of          • weighs and mixes ingredients, loads machine
   masticating, mixing, extruding and vacuum                 with plastic to be worked or regulates flow from
                                                                                                                    2
   moulding machinery;                                       feed conveyor or hopper;

• operates winding machinery to form endless belts      • monitors controls regulating temperature,
   and builds up rubberised material to form                 pressure, etc. and operates moulding, extruding,
   industrial belting and pneumatic tyres;                   calendering, thermoforming and covering
                                                             machines;
                                                                                                                    3
• prepares surfaces and coats or lines metal or other
   products with rubber;                                • inspects plastic products for defects, takes
                                                             measurements and repairs plastic belting and
• trims, sandblasts, or manipulates rubber article           sheathing;
   against abrasive wheel to finish product;
                                                        • trims, cuts and performs other finishing
                                                                                                                    4
• locates defects and repairs worn and faulty                operations on plastic using hand and machine
   sheathing, belting and rubber and pneumatic               tools;
   tyres.
                                                        • makes artificial eyes and contact lens discs, and
                                                             makes and repairs spectacle frames and plastic         5
RELATED JOB TITLES                                           parts of artificial limbs and other orthopaedic
                                                             appliances.
Curer (rubber)
Rubber moulder (moulds)
Rubber worker
Tyre maker
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES                                          6
Vulcaniser                                              Extruder operator (plastics mfr)
                                                        Fabricator (plastics mfr)
                                                        Fibreglass laminator
                                                        Injection moulder (plastics goods mfr)
8116 PLASTICS PROCESS                                   Plastic moulder                                             7
     OPERATIVES
Workers in this unit group attend and operate
moulding, extruding, thermoforming, calendering,
covering, cutting and other process equipment to                                                                    8
make and repair plastic products.




                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   237
Major Group 8



                8117 METAL MAKING AND                                         Jigger (metal trades)
                     TREATING PROCESS                                         Rolling mill operator
                                                                              Wire drawer
                     OPERATIVES
                Metal making and treating process operatives operate
                furnaces, ovens and other heating vessels, drawing,           8118 ELECTROPLATERS
                rolling, extruding, galvanising, forging and other
                metal processing equipment to smelt, shape and treat          Electroplaters operate continuous plant to coat metal
                metal and metal products.                                     parts and articles electrolytically, form metal articles
                                                                              by electro- and vacuum-deposition, dip and spray
                                                                              articles with another metal, plastic powder or other
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      material and treat articles chemically to produce
  1             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     desired surface finishes.

                There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                SVQs in Steel Making, Steel Refining, Steel Casting           ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
  2             and Metal Forging are available at Levels 2 and 3.
                                                                              There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                                                                              Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
                TASKS                                                         SVQs in Product Coating are available at Levels 2
                                                                              and 3.
                • charges furnace, operates controls to regulate
  3                furnace temperature, and adds oxidising, alloying
                   and fluxing agents as required;                            TASKS

                • withdraws samples of molten metal for analysis,             • cleans and rinses article or preshaped former to
                   taps slag from surface of molten metal and directs            be coated;
                   flow of molten metal into casts;
  4                                                                           • masks area not to be covered with wax, resistant
                • sets rolling speed, tension and space between                  adhesive tape or other material;
                   rolls, guides the metal to and from rollers, and
                   monitors the rolling process to detect                     • fits appropriate nozzle on spray gun, loads spray
                   irregularities, and ensure that the gauge and finish          gun with appropriate coating material and
                   match required specifications;                                prepares electrolytic solutions;
  5
                • operates equipment to remove dirt, scale and                • sets machine, plant, or equipment controls to
                   other surface impurities by immersion in                      regulate electric current and temperature of
                   chemical solution;                                            molten zinc, tin, chromium, copper or other non-
                                                                                 ferrous metal;
                • heats metal or metal articles in furnace, allows
  6                to cool for a specified time or quenches in brine,         • immerses articles in plating solutions or sprays
                   oil or water to harden, reduces brittleness and               article until required thickness of coating has
                   restores ductility;                                           been deposited;

                • operates piercing, extruding, galvanising,                  • removes article from solution and centrifuges, if
                   pressing and other metal processing equipment                 necessary, to remove excess molten metal before
  7                to shape and treat metal or metal articles.                   cooling.



                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            RELATED JOB TITLES

  8             Annealer                                                      Anodiser
                Furnaceman (metal trades)                                     Electroplater
                Heat treatment operator (metal)                               Galvaniser



  9

                238      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                 Major Group 8
8119 PROCESS OPERATIVES NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
processing occupations not elsewhere classified in
MINOR GROUP 811: Process Operatives.



TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though some employers may expect entrants to
possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically                                                                     1
provided on-the-job, supplemented by specialist
training courses. NVQs/SVQs in Process Operations
are available at Levels 1, 2 and 3.



TASKS
                                                                                                                  2
• packs products ready for kilnsetting;
• operates kilns, furnaces and ovens to produce
   cement clinker, linoleum cement and asphalt, to
   fire abrasive and carbon products and otherwise
                                                                                                                  3
   cook and heat treat materials and products not
   elsewhere classified;

• operates machines to mix, blend, crush, wash and
   separate seeds and other materials not elsewhere
   classified;
                                                                                                                  4
• operates machines to produce flat and corrugated
   asbestos cement pipes and sheets;

• performs other processing tasks not elsewhere
   classified.
                                                                                                                  5

RELATED JOB TITLES

Concrete worker (concrete products mfr)                                                                           6
Process worker (jewellery, plate mfr)




                                                                                                                  7


                                                                                                                  8


                                                                                                                  9

                                                      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   239
Major Group 8



                                              MINOR GROUP 812
                                       PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES
                Workers in this minor group operate plant and machinery to produce paper, wood and
                related products, operate drilling and excavating equipment to extract coal and other
                minerals, attend and operate boilers, compressors, turbines, electrical substations and other
                power generation equipment, operate machinery to cut, shape and finish metal, operate
                and attend water purifying, sedimentation and sewerage systems, and perform other
                miscellaneous operative tasks.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
  1
                      8121    PAPER AND WOOD MACHINE OPERATIVES
                      8122    COAL MINE OPERATIVES
                      8123    QUARRY WORKERS AND RELATED OPERATIVES
  2                   8124    ENERGY PLANT OPERATIVES
                      8125    METAL WORKING MACHINE OPERATIVES
                      8126    WATER AND SEWERAGE PLANT OPERATIVES
                      8129    PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES NEC
  3
                8121 PAPER AND WOOD MACHINE                                     and staples, and fits metal strips and corner pieces
                     OPERATIVES                                                 to strengthen container as required;

  4             Paper and wood machine operatives operate                    • examines job requirements, ascertains
                machines to produce, treat and cut wood, paper,                 necessary ingredients and loads machines to
                paperboard, leatherboard, plasterboard and similar              beat, mix and crush wood, cork and pulp for
                material, assemble and make wooden crates and                   further processing;
                containers.                                                  • attends and operates ovens, kilns, milling,
  5                                                                             filtering, straining, calendering, coating, drying,
                                                                                finishing, winding and other machines to produce
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                        and/or treat wood, paper, paperboard,
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                       leatherboard and plasterboard;

                There are no formal academic entry requirements.             • sets and adjusts edge guides, stops and blades of
  6             Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/                cutting machine, threads material through rollers
                SVQs in Paper and Board Making and in Leather                   or loads into machine hopper, starts and monitors
                Production are available at Level 2. NVQs/SVQs                  operation of machine, removes completed work
                in Woodmachining are available at Levels 2                      and clears machine of waste material.
                and 3.
  7
                                                                             RELATED JOB TITLES
                TASKS
                                                                             Case maker
                • cuts and shapes wood using hand and power                  Guillotine operator (paper goods mfr)
  8                tools, assembles parts of wooden crates, barrels          Sawyer (wood)
                                                                             Wood machinist
                   and other wooden containers using nails, bolts




  9

                240     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 8
8122 COAL MINE OPERATIVES                                Power loader (coal mine)
                                                         Underground worker
Coal mine operatives detonate charges and use
cutting equipment to extract coal from coal faces,
build and dismantle roof and wall supports in
underground coal workings, and transport coal and        8123 QUARRY WORKERS AND
other material from the coal face.                            RELATED OPERATIVES
                                                         Quarry workers erect supports in underground
                                                         workings, set and detonate explosives to loosen
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 rocks, and set up and operate drilling equipment to
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                extract minerals (other than coal) from the ground,
                                                         and operate machinery to wash, crush or separate
There are no formal academic entry requirements.         coal, stone and ores.                                       1
Training is provided through specialised courses.
NVQs/SVQs in Process Operations (Extraction
Industries) are available. There is a minimum age
limit of 18 years for underground work.                  TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                     2
                                                         There are no formal academic entry requirements.
TASKS                                                    Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
                                                         SVQs in Drilling Operations and Process Operations
• uses machine or portable drill to drill holes to       (Extractive Industries) are available at Level 2.
   required depth for blasting, bursting, release of     There is a lower age limit of 18 for underground
   gas or water infusion;                                work.                                                       3
• inserts and compacts appropriate explosive,
   primer and detonator in drilling hole and
   detonates charge to break and loosen coal and         TASKS
   rock from solid formations;

• operates heading, ripping and coal cutting-
                                                         • inspects blasting area, drills shot holes, inserts        4
                                                              explosives and detonates charges to loosen large
   loading machines to remove material from                   pieces of rock/ore;
   working face, and monitors conveyor carrying
   away loose material;                                  • assembles drilling and cutting tools, operates
                                                              controls to start machines and to regulate the
• cleans machinery, equipment and tools, and
   maintains refuge holes, roads and airways;
                                                              speed and pressure of cutting and drilling;            5
                                                         • erects timber or metal supports to shore up tunnel
• erects permanent and temporary wall and roof                and assists tunnel miner with the excavation of
   supports from dry stone material, timber and metal,        vertical shafts and underground tunnels;
   withdraws supports and serviceable material/
   equipment from worked out or abandoned faces;         • conveys goods and materials to and from the               6
                                                              workface, loads and unloads mine cars and
• stows waste in area from which coal has been                transfers materials from underground and surface
   removed using feed hopper or stowing machine;
                                                              conveyors to bunkers, tubs and rail trucks;
• conveys goods and materials to and from coal face      • operates agitators/vibrators to separate minerals
   and work areas, loads and unloads mine cars and
   transfers materials from underground and surface
                                                              and ensures that screened, filtered, crushed and       7
                                                              separated material is discharged to appropriate
   conveyors to bunkers, tubs and rail trucks.
                                                              chutes or conveyors;

                                                         • performs other mining and quarrying tasks not
RELATED JOB TITLES                                            elsewhere classified including digging clay from
                                                              open pits, operating high-pressure hoses to wash       8
Coal miner                                                    china clay from open pit faces and otherwise
Miner (coal mine)                                             assisting miners.



                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   241
Major Group 8


                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            Boiler operator
                                                                              Stoker
                Miner (mine, not coal)                                        Substation attendant (electricity supplier)
                Quarry worker                                                 Unit operator
                Roughneck
                Washery operator
                Well driller
                                                                              8125 METAL WORKING MACHINE
                                                                                   OPERATIVES
                8124 ENERGY PLANT OPERATIVES                                  Metal working machine operatives operate machines
                                                                              to cut, shape, abrade and otherwise machine metal,
                Workers in this unit group operate boilers to produce
                                                                              use hand and power tools to remove surplus metal
  1             hot water or steam and attend and operate
                compressors, turbines, electrical substations,                and rough surfaces from castings, forgings or other
                switchboards and auxiliary plant and machinery to             metal parts, and clean, smooth and polish metal
                fuel nuclear reactors, drive blowers and pumps,               workpieces.
                electricity generators and other equipment.

  2                                                                           TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                There are no formal academic entry requirements.              Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/
                Training is typically by apprenticeship, incorporating        SVQs in Engineering Machining are available at
  3             technical training and practical experience. NVQs/            Level 1.
                SVQs in Maintaining Electricity Generating Systems
                are available at Levels 2 and 3.
                                                                              TASKS

  4             TASKS                                                         • secures workpiece in drilling, boring, milling,
                                                                                 planing, grinding, lapping, honing,
                • determines job requirements from switchboard                   electrochemical, or other shaping machines, or
                   attendant or operating instructions;                          loads metal stock on to press;

                • opens valves and operates controls to regulate              • sets controls, starts machine and operates
  5                the flow of fuel to boiler or generating equipment;           controls to feed tool to workpiece or vice versa
                                                                                 and repositions workpiece during machining as
                • operates remote control panel to load fuel and                 required;
                   remove discharged fuel elements from nuclear
                   reactors;                                                  • withdraws workpiece and examines accuracy
                                                                                 using measuring instruments;
                • adjusts controls to maintain correct running speed
  6                of turbine or generator and monitors temperature           • operates burning, chipping and grinding
                   and pressure controls on boilers;                             equipment to remove defects from metal parts,
                                                                                 and files, chisels, burns and saws off surplus
                • records instrument readings periodically and                   metal;
                   shuts down turbine/generator or boiler as demand
                   decreases;                                                 • smoothes rough surfaces with hand tools,
  7                                                                              abrasive belts and wheels, compressed air, jets
                • carries out minor maintenance tasks and
                   prescribed tests and reports any faults.                      of vapour, or blasting with shot, grit, sand or other
                                                                                 abrasive material;

                                                                              • selects and secures polishing head to machine
  8             RELATED JOB TITLES                                               tool, prepares head with emery, grease or other
                                                                                 substance, sets speed and angle of polishing head,
                Auxiliary plant attendant                                        and operates controls to feed polishing head to
                Boiler attendant                                                 workpiece or vice versa.


  9

                242      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                       • digs trench and assists pipelayers to lay, renew




                                                                                                                  Major Group 8
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                            or repair sewerage pipes.
Fettler (metal trades)
Grinding machinist (metal trades)
Metal polisher                                         RELATED JOB TITLES
Press operator (metal trades)
Shot blaster                                           Filter attendant (water works)
Tool room machinist                                    Plant operator (sewage/water works)
                                                       Sewerman
                                                       Turncock
8126 WATER AND SEWERAGE                                Water treatment plant operator
     PLANT OPERATIVES
                                                                                                                   1
Water and sewerage plant operatives operate valves     8129 PLANT AND MACHINE
to control water supplies in mains and pipelines,
                                                            OPERATIVES NEC
attend screening, filtering, water purifying and
sedimentation plant, clear any blockages and patrol    Plant and machine operatives n.e.c. operate a variety
and maintain sewerage systems.                         of plant and machinery not elsewhere classified in          2
                                                       MINOR GROUP 812: Plant and Machine
                                                       Operatives.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                       TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
There are no formal academic entry requirements.       ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                   3
Training is provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Operating Process Plant are available at       There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Level 2.                                               Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
                                                       SVQs are available in some areas.
                                                                                                                   4
TASKS
                                                       TASKS
• attends water filtration and purification plant,
   monitors chemical treatment, regulates treatment    • operates acetylene torches and other cutting
   of water supply within strict guidelines;                equipment to dismantle boilers, cars, ships,
                                                            railway track, engines, machinery and other scrap
                                                                                                                   5
• opens and closes valves to regulate quantity and          metal;
   pressure of water and reports defective valves
   or abnormal water pressure;                         • bends, coils, crimps and spins metal wires in the
                                                            manufacture of cables, springs, rope and other
• stops water supply in an emergency and informs
   consumers likely to be affected;
                                                            wire goods;
                                                                                                                   6
                                                       • operates machines in the manufacture of nuts,
• regulates flow of raw sewage into screening plant,        bolts, nails, screws, pins, rivets, etc.;
   releases screened sewage and regulates its flow
   into detritus pits, sedimentation tanks and         • fills grease gun with grease of appropriate grade,
   filtration beds;                                         and applies grease or oil to grease points or
                                                            lubrication holes in machinery or equipment and        7
• cleans out screen compartments, sedimentation             over bearings, axles and other similar parts;
   tanks and filtration beds manually or using
   mechanical scraper;                                 • ensures that rollers in rope haulage system are
                                                            well greased and running freely;
• patrols sections of sewer, examines for any
   blockages or gas releases and clears blockages      • inspects machines and equipment, and reports              8
   by flushing or by using boring rods;                     any faults.




                                                                                                                   9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   243
Major Group 8


                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Duct erector
                Guillotine operator (metal trades)
                Pumpsman
                Saw doctor
                Spring maker
                Television aerial erector
                Wire worker




  1


  2


  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                244      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 8
                         MINOR GROUP 813
                 ASSEMBLERS AND ROUTINE OPERATIVES
Assemblers and routine operatives perform routine tasks in the wiring of electrical
equipment, assembly of prepared parts in the manufacture of vehicles, electrical, metal
and other goods, inspect, test, sort, weigh and grade products, parts and materials, fit and
repair tyres, exhausts and windscreens on motor vehicles, mark out and cut material for
garment making, sew and embroider garments, perform routine laboratory tests of products
and materials and perform a variety of other routine assembly operations not elsewhere
classified.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:                                      1

       8131   ASSEMBLERS (ELECTRICAL PRODUCTS)
       8132   ASSEMBLERS (VEHICLES AND METAL GOODS)
       8133   ROUTINE INSPECTORS AND TESTERS                                                                        2
       8134   WEIGHERS, GRADERS, SORTERS
       8135   TYRE, EXHAUST AND WINDSCREEN FITTERS
       8136   CLOTHING CUTTERS
       8137   SEWING MACHINISTS                                                                                     3
       8138   ROUTINE LABORATORY TESTERS
       8139   ASSEMBLERS AND ROUTINE OPERATIVES NEC

                                                                                                                    4
8131 ASSEMBLERS (ELECTRICAL                             • selects, cuts and connects wire to appropriate
     PRODUCTS)                                               terminals by crimping or soldering;

Workers in this unit group wire up prepared parts       • positions and secures switches, transformers,
and/or sub-assemblies in the manufacture of                  tags, valve holders or other parts and connects
electrical and electronic equipment, make coils and          capacitors, resistors, transistors or sub-             5
wiring harnesses and assemble previously prepared            assemblies to appropriate terminals by soldering;
parts in the batch or mass production of electrical     • lays out and secures wire to make harnesses
and electronic goods and components.                         and operates machine to wind heavy and light
                                                             coils of wire or copper for transformers,
                                                             armatures, rotors, stators and light electrical        6
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                     equipment;
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                        • assembles previously prepared electrical or
There are no formal academic entry requirements.             electronic components by winding, bolting,
Training is typically provided on-the-job,                   screwing or otherwise fastening using an
supplemented by short courses. NVQs/SVQs in                  assembly machine or hand tools.                        7
Electronic Product Assembly are available at Level 1.

                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES
TASKS

• examines drawings, specifications and wiring
                                                        Armature winder
                                                        Assembler (electrical, electronic equipment)
                                                                                                                    8
   diagrams to identify appropriate materials and       Coil winder
   sequence of operations;                              Wireman/woman


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   245
Major Group 8



                8132 ASSEMBLERS (VEHICLES                                    TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                     AND METAL GOODS)                                        ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Workers in this unit group undertake the routine             There are no formal academic entry requirements,
                assembly of vehicles and other metal goods or                although some employers require candidates to
                components such as frames, axles, wire brushes and           possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically
                wheels.                                                      received on-the-job, supplemented by training
                                                                             courses where instruction in specific techniques is
                                                                             required. Various NVQs/SVQs encompass aspects
                                                                             of quality control.
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

  1             No academic qualifications are required. In some             TASKS
                cases candidates must take aptitude and dexterity
                tests. Normal colour vision is required for some             • examines articles for surface flaws such as cracks,
                jobs. Training varies according to the complexity               dents, defective sealing or broken wires by visual
                of the work.                                                    inspection or using aids such as microscopes or
                                                                                magnifying glasses;
  2
                                                                             • checks sequence of assembly operations and
                TASKS                                                           checks assemblies and sub-assemblies against
                                                                                parts lists to detect missing items;
                • follows instructions and drawings and positions
                   components on work bench or in assembly                   • sets up test equipment, connects items/system to
  3                machine;                                                     power source/pressure outlet, etc. and operates
                                                                                controls to check performance and operation of
                • assembles prepared components in sequence by                  electrical plant and machinery and electronics
                   soldering, bolting, fastening, spot-welding,                 systems;
                   screwing and hammering using power and hand
                   tools or assembly machine;                                • examines yarn packages, textile fabrics and
  4                                                                             garments, wood or wood products, paper and
                • rejects faulty assembly components;                           paperboard, plastics and rubber materials, food
                                                                                products, food storage containers, etc., checks
                • inspects finished article for faults, monitors
                                                                                specifications, marks any repairable defects and
                   assembly machine operation and reports any
                                                                                rejects faulty items;
                   faults.
  5                                                                          • reports any recurrent or major defects and
                                                                                recommends improvements to production
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                              methods.

                Assembler (metal trades)
  6             Car assembler
                Lineworker (vehicle mfr)
                                                                             RELATED JOB TITLES

                                                                             Engineering inspector
                                                                             Examiner (manufacturing)
                8133 ROUTINE INSPECTORS AND                                  Passer (manufacturing)
                                                                             Quality control inspector (manufacturing)
  7                  TESTERS
                                                                             Test engineer
                Workers in this unit group inspect and/or test               Viewer (electrical goods mfr)
                metal stock, parts and products, electrical plant,
                machinery and electronic components, systems
                and sub-assemblies, textiles, wood, paper, food,
  8             plastics and rubber goods, parts and materials to
                detect processing, manufacturing and other
                defects.



  9

                246     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 8
8134 WEIGHERS, GRADERS,                                  8135 TYRE, EXHAUST AND
     SORTERS                                                  WINDSCREEN FITTERS
Workers in this unit group weigh, grade and sort         Tyre, exhaust and windscreen fitters fit, repair and
materials, goods and products.                           adjust tyres, exhausts and windscreens on cars, buses,
                                                         motorcycles and other motor vehicles.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job,               There are no formal academic entry requirements.
supplemented by short courses relating to the specific   Training is typically provided on-the-job, or               1
material or product being considered.                    through training programmes within larger
                                                         companies. NVQs/SVQs in Vehicle Maintenance
                                                         (Service Replacement) are available at Levels 1
TASKS                                                    and 2.
                                                                                                                     2
• examines hide, skins, leather, fabric, wool, rags,
   scrap metal, tobacco pipe bowls, fish, fibres,        TASKS
   ceramics, produce and other goods;
                                                         • carries out inspection and assesses the nature and
• assesses product quality visually and by touch,             extent of repair necessary;
   and grades according to weight, thickness, colour                                                                 3
   and other quality criteria;                           • removes wheel, exhaust or windscreen using
                                                              semi-automatic machinery or hand and power
• ascertains material(s) required from order card,            tools;
   recipe, or specification and weighs and measures
   prescribed quantities accordingly;                    • separates tyre from wheel and fits replacement
                                                              tyre using automatic machine or by using a wheel
                                                                                                                     4
• uses balances, springs, weighing platforms,                 stand and hand tools;
   automatic scales and weighbridges to check
   the weight of goods, products and loaded              • inflates tyre to correct pressure, refits wheel to
   vehicles;                                                  axle and balances wheel using balancing

• records and calculates gross and net weight,
                                                              machine;                                               5
   checks delivery notes and prepares documents          • replaces faulty parts of exhaust and refits exhaust
   and labels for identification purposes;                    or windscreen to vehicle.

• operates machines to measure lengths of rolls of
   material and irregularly shaped materials such
   as leather or sheepskin.
                                                         RELATED JOB TITLES                                          6
                                                         Exhaust fitter (vehicles)
                                                         Tyre and exhaust fitter
RELATED JOB TITLES                                       Tyre fitter

Egg grader
                                                         Windscreen fitter                                           7
Fruit sorter
Selector (ceramics mfr)
Weighbridge clerk
Weigher
                                                                                                                     8


                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   247
Major Group 8



                8136 CLOTHING CUTTERS                                        TASKS

                Clothing cutters examine fabrics, mark out and cut           • examines natural and synthetic fabrics of all types
                material for garment making.                                    to identify imperfections and determine best
                                                                                method of repair;

                                                                             • operates standard and specialised machines to
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                        sew and repair garments and other textile, fabric,
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                       fur and skin products;
                There are no formal academic entry requirements.             • performs hand sewing tasks in the making and
                Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/                finishing of fur, sheepskin, leather, upholstery,
                SVQs in Manufacturing Sewn Products are available               mats, carpets, umbrellas and other textile products;
  1             at Levels 1 and 2.
                                                                             • embroiders decorative designs on, or secures
                                                                                trimmings to, textile fabric with hand or machine
                                                                                stitching;
                TASKS
                                                                             • cleans and oils machine and reports or remedies
  2             • examines fabrics or skins for flaws, grain and                any mechanical faults.
                   stretch;

                • cuts out blemishes, brushes, combs and moistens
                   skins;                                                    RELATED JOB TITLES

                • discusses customer's requirements or examines              Burler
  3                photographs or sketches of garment;                       Clothing machinist
                                                                             Lockstitch machinist
                • places lay-plan on cloth or marks out garment              Overlocker
                   parts and linings;
                                                                             Seamstress
                • cuts material using shears, electric knife, or             Sewing machinist (clothing mfr)
  4                cutting machine.

                                                                             8138 ROUTINE LABORATORY
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                                TESTERS

  5             Band knife cutter
                Clothing cutter
                                                                             Routine laboratory testers perform routine checks,
                                                                             at various stages of production, to verify the physical,
                Cutting machinist (clothing mfr)                             chemical and other quality related characteristics of
                Marker (clothing mfr)                                        materials and products.


  6             8137 SEWING MACHINISTS                                       TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                Workers in this unit group rectify faults in
                manufactured textile goods, repair worn garments             There are no formal academic entry requirements,
                and sew and embroider garments by hand or machine.           although some employers may require GCSEs/S
  7                                                                          grades. Training is available both off- and on-the-
                                                                             job. NVQs/SVQs in Laboratory and Associated
                                                                             Technical Activities are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no formal academic entry requirements.             TASKS
  8             Training is received off- and on-the-job. NVQs/
                SVQs in Manufacturing Sewn Products are available            • examines test card to determine type of test
                at Levels 1 and 2.                                              required;


  9

                248     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• sets up appropriate testing equipment and               • sets up and operates machines to apply colour to




                                                                                                                     Major Group 8
   prepares item for testing;                                  wallpaper and to coat articles (other than
                                                               ceramic) with paint, cellulose or other protective/
• carries out prescribed tests to check acidity,               decorative material;
   alkalinity, absorption, colour, density, elasticity,
   solubility, or other physical and chemical             • performs miscellaneous painting and coating
   characteristics;                                            tasks not elsewhere classified including, staining
                                                               articles, applying transfers, operating french
• records test data and cleans, maintains and checks           polishing machines, removing surplus enamel
   equipment for reliability.                                  from components and marking design outlines
                                                               on articles.

RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                          RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                      1
Laboratory assistant
Tester (paint mfr)                                        Assembler
                                                          Dipper's assistant
                                                          Enameller
8139 ASSEMBLERS AND ROUTINE                               Shoe machinist                                              2
     OPERATIVES NEC
Workers in this unit group perform assembly and
routine operative tasks not elsewhere classified in
MINOR GROUP 813: Assemblers and Routine
Operatives.
                                                                                                                      3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                      4
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades. Some employers may set dexterity and
aptitude tests for entrants. Normal colour vision may
be required for some posts. NVQs/SVQs at Levels
1, 2 and 3 are available in a variety of areas.
                                                                                                                      5

TASKS

• follows instructions and drawings and positions                                                                     6
   components on work bench or in assembly
   machine;

• assembles prepared components in sequence by
   soldering, bolting, fastening, spot-welding,
   screwing, nailing, stapling, dipping and fastening                                                                 7
   using power and hand tools or assembly machine;

• rejects faulty assembly components, inspects
   finished article for faults, monitors assembly
   machine operation and reports any faults;
                                                                                                                      8
• applies enamel to jewellery and coats, lacquers,
   dips and touches up articles (other than ceramic);



                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   249
Major Group 8



                                                  MINOR GROUP 814
                                              CONSTRUCTION OPERATIVES
                Construction operatives erect and dismantle scaffolding and working platforms, maintain
                tall structures, construct and maintain public highways and railway tracks, lay and repair
                underground piping systems, and perform a variety of tasks in relation to the construction,
                maintenance, repair and demolition of buildings.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       8141    SCAFFOLDERS, STAGERS, RIGGERS
  1
                       8142    ROAD CONSTRUCTION OPERATIVES
                       8143    RAIL CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATIVES
                       8149    CONSTRUCTION OPERATIVES NEC
  2
                8141 SCAFFOLDERS, STAGERS,                                    • erects jib, derrick and similar hoisting equipment
                     RIGGERS                                                     and installs ropes, pulleys and other lifting
                                                                                 tackle;
                Workers in this unit group erect and dismantle
  3             scaffolding and working platforms, set up lifting             • forms rope slings, ladders, netting and other
                                                                                 rigging and measures, cuts and repairs wire or
                equipment and ships' rigging, maintain and repair
                steeples, industrial chimneys and other tall structures          fibre rope.
                and install, maintain and repair ropes, wires and
                cables.
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
  4
                                                                              Rigger
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              Scaffolder
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              Stager (shipbuilding)
                There are no formal academic entry requirements.
  5             Training is initially received on-the-job. Skilled
                workers must obtain Construction Industry Training
                                                                              8142 ROAD CONSTRUCTION
                Board (CITB) recognised scaffolders record scheme
                cards through the completion of approved courses                   OPERATIVES
                and further work experience. NVQs/SVQs in
                                                                              Workers in this unit group construct, repair and
                Scaffolding are available at Levels 2 and 3.
  6                                                                           maintain roads and lay paving slabs and kerbstones
                                                                              to form pavements and street gutters.

                TASKS
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                • examines drawings and specifications to
  7                determine job requirements;
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                • examines scaffold tubing and couplings for                  No academic qualifications are required. Training
                   defects and selects, fits and bolts scaffold tubes         is typically provided on-the-job. All sites are required
                   until scaffolding reaches required height;                 to have a 'trained operative' registered with the Street
                                                                              Workers Qualification Register. Trained operatives
  8             • lays and secures wooden planking to form                    are required to attend accredited assessment centres.
                   working platforms and fixes guard rails, ladders,          NVQs/SVQs in Highway Maintenance and Road
                   cradles and awnings as required;                           Building are available at Levels 1 and 2.



  9

                250      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                         • checks tightness of bolts and wedges, replaces




                                                                                                                     Major Group 8
TASKS
                                                              damaged rail chairs and repacks ballast under
• inspects road surfaces for hazards or signs of              sleepers if necessary;
   deterioration, clears mud, weeds and debris from
   road and spreads grit or salt as required;            • lubricates points, examines fences, drains,
                                                              culverts and embankments and carries out any
• cuts away broken road surface with pick or                  necessary maintenance;
   pneumatic drill;
                                                         • spreads ballast and lays sleepers or metal plates
• heats bitumen in bucket, applies it to newly laid           at specified intervals;
   asphalt and beats or draws tamper head on asphalt     • positions lengths of rail, sets of points and
   to close joints;                                           crossovers and secures rail with bolts, wooden
                                                              wedges or clips;
• spreads bitumen, tar or asphalt and compacts
   surface using roller;
                                                                                                                      1
                                                         • fastens together sections of rail by bolting
                                                              fishplates to rails.
• spreads aggregate over road surfaces using
   shovel and lays markings on road surface;

• removes damaged paving slabs and kerb stones,
   lays bedding of sand, concrete or mortar on
                                                         RELATED JOB TITLES                                           2
   prepared foundation, lays new slabs or stones         Leading trackman/woman (railways)
   and fills joints with mortar.                         Plate layer
                                                         Trackman/woman (railways)

RELATED JOB TITLES                                                                                                    3
                                                         8149 CONSTRUCTION
Asphalter
Paviour
                                                              OPERATIVES NEC
Road worker                                              Workers in this unit group operate insulating
                                                         equipment, fix plasterboard or dry linings to ceilings
                                                         and walls, help construct, maintain, repair and
                                                                                                                      4
                                                         demolish buildings and clean and resurface eroded
8143 RAIL CONSTRUCTION AND                               stonework, and lay, join and examine pipe sections
                                                         for drainage, gas, water or similar piping systems.
     MAINTENANCE OPERATIVES
Workers in this unit group lay, re-lay, repair and                                                                    5
examine railway track and maintain surrounding           TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
areas.                                                   ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                                                         There are no formal academic entry requirements.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                         Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
                                                         SVQs in General Construction Operations are
                                                                                                                      6
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                         available at Levels 1, 2 and 3.
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Off- and on-the-job training is provided. NVQs/
SVQs in Rail Transport Engineering are available         TASKS
at Levels 2 and 3.                                                                                                    7
                                                         • fills machine with insulating mixture, positions
                                                              hose, drills access hole and fills cavities or coats
                                                              surfaces to prevent loss or absorption of heat and
TASKS                                                         provide fire protection;
• patrols length of track and visually inspects rails,   • selects appropriate plasterboard or dry lining             8
   bolts, fishplates and chairs for distortion or             panels, cuts them to required size and fixes them
   fracture;                                                  to ceilings and walls;



                                                                                                                      9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   251
                • cuts, shapes and fits wood, lays bricks and tiles,
Major Group 8



                   cleans exterior surfaces of buildings and
                   resurfaces eroded stone or brickwork, and
                   performs other tasks in the construction,
                   alteration, repair and demolition of buildings;

                • selects appropriate asbestos, clay, concrete,
                   plastic or metal pipe sections and lowers them
                   into prepared trenches using hoisting equipment;

                • joints pipe by sealing with rubber, cement, lead,
                   etc., connects piping to manholes and attaches
                   pipe junctions as required;
  1
                • tests joints with electronic test equipment or by
                   filling piping with water, smoke or compressed
                   air.


  2             RELATED JOB TITLES

                Building site foreman
                Ceiling fixer
                Pipe layer
  3             Thermal insulation engineer




  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                252      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                     Major Group 8
              SUB-MAJOR GROUP 82
   TRANSPORT AND MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS AND
                  OPERATIVES
Transport and mobile machine drivers and operatives drive motor vehicles to transport
goods and people, guide and monitor the movement of rail traffic, operate mechanical
equipment on board ships, assist in the boarding, fuelling and movement of aircraft at
airports, operate lifting, earth moving and earth surfacing equipment, agricultural equipment
and other mobile machinery.
                                                                                                                      1
                           MINOR GROUP 821
                   TRANSPORT DRIVERS AND OPERATIVES
Transport drivers and operatives collect, transport and deliver goods in Large Goods
Vehicles, other lorries and vans, drive road passenger carrying vehicles, instruct people                             2
learning to drive cars and light commercial vehicles, assist train drivers in the operation of
passenger and goods trains, guide the movement of rail coaches in coal mines, sidings and
marshalling yards, control the movement of rail traffic, monitor and inspect the operations
of railways, perform deck duties and operate engines, boilers and mechanical equipment
on board ships, assist in the boarding, fuelling, and movement of aircraft at airports, and
                                                                                                                      3
perform other transport related tasks not elsewhere classified.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       8211 HEAVY GOODS VEHICLE DRIVERS
                                                                                                                      4
       8212 VAN DRIVERS
       8213 BUS AND COACH DRIVERS
       8214 TAXI, CAB DRIVERS AND CHAUFFEURS
                                                                                                                      5
       8215 DRIVING INSTRUCTORS
       8216 RAIL TRANSPORT OPERATIVES
       8217 SEAFARERS (MERCHANT NAVY); BARGE, LIGHTER AND BOAT
            OPERATIVES
       8218 AIR TRANSPORT OPERATIVES
                                                                                                                      6
       8219 TRANSPORT OPERATIVES NEC


8211 HEAVY GOODS VEHICLE                                  TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                    7
     DRIVERS                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                                                          No formal academic entry qualifications are required.
Large Goods Vehicle (LGV) drivers (formerly HGV
                                                          The LGV test incorporates a medical examination,
drivers), collect, transport and deliver goods in rigid
                                                          theory test and assessed road driving. Candidates are
vehicles over 7.5 tonnes, articulated lorries and
                                                          normally at least 21 years old. NVQs/SVQs in                8
lorries pulling trailers.
                                                          Transporting Goods by Road are available at Level 2.




                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   253
                                                                              • drives vehicle to destination in accordance with
Major Group 8


                TASKS
                                                                                 schedule;
                • checks tyres, brakes, lights, oil, water and fuel
                   levels and general condition of the vehicle;               • maintains records of journey times, mileage and
                                                                                 hours worked;
                • drives vehicle from depot to loading/unloading
                   point;                                                     • undertakes minor repairs and notifies supervisor
                                                                                 of any mechanical faults.
                • assists with loading/unloading and ensures that
                   load is evenly distributed and safely secured;

                • drives vehicle to destination in accordance with            RELATED JOB TITLES
                   schedule;
                                                                              Delivery driver
  1             • maintains records of journey times, mileage and             Van driver
                   hours worked;

                • undertakes minor repairs and notifies supervisor
                   of any mechanical faults.                                  8213 BUS AND COACH DRIVERS
  2                                                                           Bus and coach drivers drive road passenger-carrying
                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            vehicles such as buses, coaches, trams and mini-buses.

                Haulage contractor
                HGV driver                                                    TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  3             Lorry driver                                                  ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                Tanker driver
                                                                              There are no formal academic entry requirements,
                                                                              though candidates must be in possession of a full
                                                                              car driving licence. All bus and coach drivers must
                8212 VAN DRIVERS                                              pass the Passenger Carrying Vehicle (PCV) test. This
  4                                                                           incorporates a theoretical examination and assessed
                Van drivers collect, transport and deliver goods in
                vehicles up to 7.5 tonnes in weight.                          driving. Entrants to the PCV test must be at least 18
                                                                              years old. NVQs/SVQs in Transporting Passengers
                                                                              by Road are available at Levels 2 and 3.
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  5             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              TASKS
                There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                Entrants must possess a clean car driving licence.            • checks tyres, brakes, lights, oil, water and fuel
                In order to drive vehicles between 3.5 and 7.5 tonnes,           levels and general condition of the vehicle before
                                                                                 start of journey;
  6             entrants must pass an additional test for a category
                C1 licence. NVQs/SVQs in Transporting Goods by                • drives single- and double-decked vehicle over
                Road are available at Level 2.                                   pre-determined route, complying with traffic
                                                                                 regulations and keeping to time schedule;

                TASKS                                                         • stops and opens and closes doors at pre-arranged
  7                                                                              places to allow passengers to board and alight,
                • checks tyres, brakes, lights, oil, water and fuel              observing regulations concerning the number of
                   levels and general condition of the vehicle;                  passengers carried;

                • drives vehicle from depot to loading/unloading              • may collect fares from passengers and issue
                                                                                 tickets or ensure that they use a ticket machine;
  8                point;

                • assists with loading/unloading and obtains receipts         • may plan routes in conjunction with private hirer
                   from customers for goods collected/delivered;                 and assist with loading and unloading of luggage;



  9

                254      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• balances cash taken with tickets sold and may




                                                                                                                     Major Group 8
                                                          8215 DRIVING INSTRUCTORS
   be responsible for cleanliness of vehicle.
                                                          Driving instructors co-ordinate and undertake the
                                                          instruction of people learning to drive cars,
RELATED JOB TITLES                                        motorcycles, buses and haulage vehicles.

Bus driver
Coach driver                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
PSV driver                                                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                                                          There are no formal academic requirements.
8214 TAXI, CAB DRIVERS AND                                Candidates must have held a current driving licence
     CHAUFFEURS                                           for four out of the last six years, have no motoring        1
                                                          or criminal convictions and be over 21 years old.
Taxi, cab drivers and chauffeurs drive motor cars         To gain registration as an Approved Driving
for private individuals, government departments and       Instructor, entrants must pass a three-part
industrial organisations, drive taxis for public hire,    examination. Instructors for Large Goods Vehicles
drive new cars to delivery points and drive               (LGVs) and Passenger Carrying Vehicles (PCVs) are
motorcycles and other motor vehicles.                     trained internally or at specialist training                2
                                                          establishments. NVQs/SVQs in Driving Instruction
                                                          at Level 3 are available for instructors in all licence
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                  categories.
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                      3
No academic qualifications are required but most          TASKS
entrants require a clean, current driving licence and
a medical examination. Local authorities typically        • checks instruction and learning standards and
set their own tests of local knowledge and additional          discusses teaching plans with other
driving tests before awarding licences.                        instructors;
                                                                                                                      4
                                                          • plans lessons in accordance with the needs and
TASKS                                                          abilities of individual pupils;

                                                          • explains driving techniques and assists pupil with
• checks tyres, brakes, lights, oil, water and fuel            difficulties;
   levels and general condition of vehicle before
   start of journey;                                      • familiarises pupil with the Highway Code and
                                                                                                                      5
• drives passenger-carrying motor cars, taxis and              different road and traffic conditions;
   other motor cars and motorcycles, complying
   with road and traffic regulations;
                                                          • advises pupil when to apply for theoretical and
                                                               practical driving tests and familiarises them with
• collects passengers when hailed or in response               test procedures and standards.                         6
   to telephone/radio message and helps them to
   secure their luggage;
• conveys passenger to destination and helps              RELATED JOB TITLES
   unload luggage;
                                                          Driving instructor
• cleans, services and maintains vehicle or motorcycle.   HGV instructor
                                                                                                                      7

RELATED JOB TITLES

Cab driver
Chauffeur
                                                                                                                      8
Private hire driver
Taxi driver


                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   255
Major Group 8



                8216 RAIL TRANSPORT                                           RELATED JOB TITLES
                     OPERATIVES
                                                                              Level crossing keeper
                Rail transport operatives assist drivers in the               Railwayman
                operation of passenger and goods trains, drive                Shunter
                locomotive engines in coal mines, guide wagons                Signalman (railways)
                and coaches in marshalling yards and sidings to
                make up trains, operate signals and points to
                control the movement of rail traffic, and monitor
                the operation of surface and underground                      8217 SEAFARERS (MERCHANT
                railways.                                                          NAVY); BARGE, LIGHTER
                                                                                   AND BOAT OPERATIVES
  1                                                                           Workers in this unit group supervise and carry out a
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     variety of deck duties and operate and maintain
                                                                              engines, boilers and mechanical equipment on board
                There are no formal academic entry requirements.              ships.
                Candidates may be required to have good hearing,
  2             eyesight, and normal colour vision and pass a
                medical examination for entry to some posts.                  TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                Training is initially undertaken in training centres,         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                followed by practical experience on-the-job. NVQs/
                SVQs in Rail Transport Operations are available at            There are no formal academic entry requirements,
  3             Level 2.                                                      although some employers may expect entrants to
                                                                              possess GCSEs/S grades. Candidates are expected
                                                                              to pass a medical examination and have good
                TASKS                                                         eyesight. Training takes place at nautical college
                                                                              and lasts between 11-13 weeks.
                • provides crews for breakdown trains, allocates
  4                relief and replacement crews as necessary,
                   keeps crews informed of any line repairs or                TASKS
                   restrictions, and checks train running times for
                   punctuality;                                               • ensures that necessary fuel supplies are on board
                                                                                 and inspects engine, boilers and other
  5             • examines schedules and decides priority of
                   movement of trains, monitors movement of trains
                                                                                 mechanisms for correct functioning;

                   and issues instructions to drivers, signal                 • removes and repairs or replaces damaged or
                   operatives and level crossing keepers;                        worn parts of plant and machinery and ensures
                                                                                 that engine and plant machinery are well
                • operates signals and opens and closes barriers at              lubricated;
  6                level crossings as required;
                                                                              • stows cargo, assists passengers to embark and
                • examines shunting instructions, uncouples                      disembark, watches for hazards and moors or
                   wagons and coaches, guides movement of                        casts off mooring ropes as required;
                   carriages using manual points and wagon
                   breaks, links-up carriages, ensures security of            • steers ship, under the supervision of a duty
  7                couplings and reconnects brake and heating                    officer, checks navigational aids and keeps
                                                                                 bridge, wheel and chartroom clean and tidy;
                   systems;

                • assists drivers in the operation of diesel, diesel-         • performs other deck duties, including servicing
                   electric, electric and steam locomotives;                     and maintaining deck gear and rigging, splicing
                                                                                 wire and fibre ropes, greasing winches and
  8             • checks loading of tubs and carriages, and informs              derricks, opening up and battening down hatches,
                   driver of load distribution and any special                   securing gangways and ladders and lowering and
                   features of route.                                            raising lifeboats.



  9

                256      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 8
RELATED JOB TITLES                                       8219 TRANSPORT OPERATIVES
                                                              NEC
Boatman/woman
Bo'sun                                                   Workers in this unit group monitor the activities of
Deck hand (shipping)                                     bus drivers, conductors and other road transport
Merchant seaman/woman                                    depot drivers, undertake various tasks related to
Seaman/woman (shipping)                                  water transportation, and perform other
                                                         transportation tasks not elsewhere classified.

8218 AIR TRANSPORT
     OPERATIVES                                          TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                         ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Air transport operatives refuel, load and unload                                                                     1
aircraft, direct the movement of aircraft at airports,   There are no formal academic entry requirements.
and positions gangways or staircases to allow            Training is provided both off- and on-the-job.
passengers to board and disembark aircraft.              NVQs/SVQs in Organising Road Transport
                                                         Operations and Marine Operations are available at
                                                         Level 2.
                                                                                                                     2
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                         TASKS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though employers may require entrants to possess         • checks that vehicles run as scheduled, monitors
GCSEs/S grades for some posts. Training is
                                                              number of passengers travelling particular routes
                                                                                                                     3
provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in
                                                              and makes recommendations for improvement
Providing Airside Ramp Operations are available at
                                                              of services;
Level 2.
                                                         • organises relief and replacement crews as
                                                              necessary, ensures compliance with regulations         4
TASKS                                                         regarding the carrying of passenger and luggage,
                                                              and submits reports of any irregularities;
•   refuels aircraft from mobile tankers;
                                                         • checks that goods have been correctly loaded
•   directs the ground movement of aircraft at                into vehicle, monitors and records information
    airports;                                                 from tachographs, and arranges for servicing,          5
                                                              refuelling, cleaning and repair of depot
•   loads and unloads conveyor belts to transport
    luggage between terminal buildings and aircraft,          vehicles;
    monitors conveyor belts and clears any               • operates lighthouses and locks, opens and closes
    blockages;
                                                              moving bridge across inland waterways and
•   loads aircraft with luggage, in-flight meals,             docks, maintains navigational lights in harbours,      6
    refreshments and other items;                             assists in mooring craft, and measures depth of
                                                              water in canals, rivers, etc. to determine possible
•   operates retractable gangway or positions mobile          dumping or dredging sites;
    staircases to enable passengers and crew to board
    and disembark aircraft.                              • guides horses or ponies and drives horse drawn
                                                              vehicles to transport goods and passengers.            7
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                         RELATED JOB TITLES
Aircraft handler
Airport hand                                             Bus inspector                                               8
Baggage handler                                          Lock keeper
Ramp agent                                               Transport supervisor



                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   257
Major Group 8



                                       MINOR GROUP 822
                             MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS AND OPERATIVES
                Workers in this minor group drive and operate earth moving and surfacing equipment,
                cranes, power driven hoisting machinery, fork-lift trucks, tractor driven and other agricultural
                machinery, and operate other mobile machines not elsewhere classified.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       8221    CRANE DRIVERS
  1                    8222    FORK-LIFT TRUCK DRIVERS
                       8223    AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY DRIVERS
                       8229    MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS AND OPERATIVES NEC


  2             8221 CRANE DRIVERS                                            • watches control panel for warning lights and
                                                                                 indications of wind speed and direction and
                Crane drivers supervise and undertake the operation              carrying capacity of crane;
                of cranes, jib cranes, power driven hoisting
                machinery and power driven stationary engine to               • oils and greases machine and checks ropes.
  3             raise and lower mine and other cages, lift and to move
                equipment, materials, machinery and containers.
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES

                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      Banksman (coal mine)
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     Crane driver/operator
  4                                                                           Winding engine operator
                There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                Training is typically provided on-the-job,
                supplemented by short courses. Operators are                  8222 FORK-LIFT TRUCK DRIVERS
                required to hold a Certificates of Training
  5             Achievement (CTA) card administered by the
                Construction Industry Training Board,
                                                                              Fork-lift truck drivers operate fork-lift trucks in
                                                                              factories, warehouses, storerooms and other areas
                demonstrating basic skills and safety awareness.              to transfer goods and materials.


                TASKS                                                         TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  6                                                                           ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                • gives signals for movement of cage carrying
                   workers/equipment;                                         There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                                                                              Training is through accredited training schemes
                • starts crane or engine motor and checks that cables         provided in-house or by manufacturers. NVQs/SVQs
                   run freely and that brakes and drum(s) are working;
  7                                                                           in Lift Truck Operations are available at Level 2.
                • manipulates levers, switches and pedals to rotate
                   jibs into position and turns winding drum to raise
                   or lower hook, bucket or other holding                     TASKS
                   equipment;
                                                                              • operates controls to pick up load on forks;
  8             • lifts load or cage, or hauls object into required
                   position and lowers or positions for ground                • drives truck to unloading point and lowers forks
                   workers to detach, unload or load;                            to correct position on stack or ground;



  9

                258      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• ensures that truck is connected to charger or is




                                                                                                                   Major Group 8
                                                        8229 MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS
   correctly refuelled for use;                              AND OPERATIVES NEC
• keeps records of work undertaken;                     Workers in this unit group supervise and undertake
• cleans, oils and greases machine.                     the operation of machines to transport, excavate,
                                                        grade, level, and compact sand, earth, gravel and
                                                        similar materials, drive piles into the ground and lay
                                                        surfaces of asphalt, concrete and chippings, and
RELATED JOB TITLES                                      operate other mobile machines not elsewhere
                                                        classified in MINOR GROUP 822: Mobile Machine
Fork-lift driver                                        Drivers and Operatives.
Fork-lift operator
Fork-lift truck driver
Stacker truck driver                                                                                                1
                                                        TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                        ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8223 AGRICULTURAL                                       No academic qualifications are required. On-the-
     MACHINERY DRIVERS                                  job training is provided. The appropriate current
                                                        driving licence will be required for driving on public
                                                                                                                    2
Workers in this unit group operate and drive tractor-   highways.
drawn or other machinery to clear and cultivate land
and to sow and harvest plants and crops.
                                                        TASKS
                                                                                                                    3
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                • fixes any necessary extensions onto machine and
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                    loads machine with asphalt, concrete, bitumen,
                                                             tar, stone chippings or any other required
No academic qualifications are required. Candidates          materials;
will require the relevant driving licence to operate
vehicles on public roads. A variety of NVQs/SVQs        • manipulates levers, pedals and switches to                4
in Agriculture are available and incorporate the             manoeuvre vehicle, regulate angle and height of
operation of agricultural machinery.                         blades, buckets and hammers and starts conveyor,
                                                             suction or water spraying system;

                                                        • watches operation and removes any likely
TASKS                                                        obstacle or obstructions;                              5
• attaches plough, cultivator, distributor, mower,      • directs refilling of machine hopper and repeats
   baler or other implement to tractor;                      operations as necessary;

• adjusts depth, speed and height of attached           • cleans, oils and greases machine and carries out
   implement according to requirements;                      minor repairs.                                         6
• drives and operates machinery to plough,
   fertilise, plant, cultivate or harvest crops;
                                                        RELATED JOB TITLES
• services and maintains equipment and carries out
   any minor repairs.                                   Digger driver
                                                        Excavator driver
                                                                                                                    7
                                                        Heavy plant operator
                                                        JCB driver
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                        Plant operator (building and contracting)
Agricultural machinist
Tractor driver (agriculture)                                                                                        8


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   259
                                                                                                         Major Group 9
                        MAJOR GROUP 9
                    ELEMENTARY OCCUPATIONS
This major group covers occupations which require the knowledge and experience necessary
to perform mostly routine tasks, often involving the use of simple hand-held tools and, in
some cases, requiring a degree of physical effort.


Most occupations in this major group do not require formal educational qualifications but
will usually have an associated short period of formal experience-related training.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor                     1
groups:

91 ELEMENTARY TRADES, PLANT AND STORAGE RELATED
   OCCUPATIONS                                                                                            2
    911   ELEMENTARY AGRICULTURAL OCCUPATIONS
    912   ELEMENTARY CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS
    913   ELEMENTARY PROCESS PLANT OCCUPATIONS
    914   ELEMENTARY GOODS STORAGE OCCUPATIONS
                                                                                                          3

92 ELEMENTARY ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE
   OCCUPATIONS
                                                                                                          4
    921   ELEMENTARY ADMINISTRATION OCCUPATIONS
    922   ELEMENTARY PERSONAL SERVICES OCCUPATIONS
    923   ELEMENTARY CLEANING OCCUPATIONS
    924   ELEMENTARY SECURITY OCCUPATIONS                                                                 5
    925   ELEMENTARY SALES OCCUPATIONS



                                                                                                          6


                                                                                                          7


                                                                                                          8


                                                                                                          9

                                              Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   261
Major Group 9



                                SUB-MAJOR GROUP 91
                        ELEMENTARY TRADES, PLANT AND STORAGE
                               RELATED OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this sub-major group perform agricultural, fishing and forestry related tasks,
                undertake general labouring duties and assist building and construction trades workers,
                perform a variety of duties in foundry, engineering and other process and plant related
                trades, and assist in the storage and transportation of goods.


  1                                     MINOR GROUP 911
                              ELEMENTARY AGRICULTURAL OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this minor group cultivate and harvest crops, breed and rear animals, catch and
                breed fish and other aquatic life and perform forestry and related tasks.
  2
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       9111 FARM WORKERS
                       9112 FORESTRY WORKERS
  3
                       9119 FISHING AND AGRICULTURE RELATED OCCUPATIONS NEC


                9111 FARM WORKERS                                             • cleans barns, sheds, pens, yards, incubators and
  4             Farm workers perform a variety of tasks, by hand
                                                                                 breeding units and sterilises milking and other
                                                                                 equipment as necessary;
                and machine, to produce and harvest crops and to
                breed and rear cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry.               • treats minor ailments and assists veterinary
                                                                                 surgeon as required;

                                                                              • tends flock of sheep and is responsible for their
  5             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                         welfare;
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              • implements breeding policy, mates animals and
                There are no minimum academic entry requirements.                tends them during birth of young.
                Training is typically received on-the-job,
  6             supplemented by vocational training at an
                agricultural college. A variety of NVQs/SVQs in               RELATED JOB TITLES
                Agriculture are available at Levels 1 and 2.
                                                                              Agricultural worker
                                                                              Farm labourer
                TASKS                                                         Farm worker
  7                                                                           Herdsman
                • operates farm machinery to prepare soil, fertilise          Shepherd
                   and treat crops;

                • cultivates growing crops by hoeing, spraying and
                   thinning as necessary;                                     9112 FORESTRY WORKERS
  8
                • weighs and measures foodstuffs, feeds animals               Forestry workers perform a variety of tasks related
                   and checks them for any signs of disease;                  to the planting, cultivation and protection of trees.



  9

                262      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 9
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no minimum academic entry requirements.        There are no minimum academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job,               Training is typically received on-the-job,
supplemented by short courses covering specialised       supplemented by vocational training at an
skills. NVQs/SVQs in Forestry are available at           agricultural college. A variety of NVQs/SVQs in
Levels 1 and 2.                                          Agriculture, Fish Husbandry and Fishing Vessel
                                                         Operations are available at Levels 1 and 2.
                                                         Fishermen/women are required to undertake a three
TASKS                                                    day safety course.

• prepares ground for planting by clearing                                                                           1
   vegetation and other debris;                          TASKS
• drains and ploughs land and erects and maintains       • assists with the shooting, hauling and repairing
   fences as necessary;                                       of nets, prepares, lays and empties baited pots at
                                                              intervals, operates winches and lifting gear, and
• collects seeds, plants and prunes trees and selects
   and marks trees for felling;                               guts, sorts and stows fish;                            2
• fells trees using axe or power saw and saws wood       • harvests oysters, mussels, clams and seaweed off
   into required lengths;                                     natural or artificial beds, nets river fish and
                                                              maintains them in spawning pens, assists with
• removes tops of standing trees and lops branches            feeding and water treatment, and empties and
   as necessary;                                              cleans outdoor tanks;
                                                                                                                     3
• assists in the control of harmful diseases, pests      • cleans animals' quarters and renews bedding as
   or forms of wildlife;                                      necessary;

• maintains watch for fires and operates firefighting    • extracts semen for storage, selects appropriate
   equipment.                                                 semen from store, injects recipient animal and         4
                                                              issues certificate giving pedigree and date of
                                                              insemination;
RELATED JOB TITLES                                       • incubates eggs in hatchery and supplies chicks
                                                              for meat and egg production and game birds for
Forestry contractor                                           reserves;                                              5
Forestry worker
Lumberjack                                               • plants cuttings or shrubs, maintains hedges by
Timber feller                                                 clipping, pruning and re-planting, and picks fruit,
                                                              vegetables, hops and flowers;

                                                         • performs other farming and related tasks not              6
9119 FISHING AND AGRICULTURE                                  elsewhere classified including sorting and
     RELATED OCCUPATIONS                                      marking livestock, catching rabbits, cutting peat,
                                                              shearing sheep and sexing chickens.
     NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of tasks                                                                7
in relation to the breeding and rearing of animals       RELATED JOB TITLES
and fish, catch fish at sea and from inland waterways,
assist in the picking and lifting of crops, plant and    Artificial inseminator
maintain hedges, oversee the incubation and hatching     Horticultural worker
of eggs and perform other fishing and agriculture        Mushroom picker
related tasks not elsewhere classified.                  Nursery worker                                              8


                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   263
Major Group 9



                                       MINOR GROUP 912
                             ELEMENTARY CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this minor group assist the work of woodworking and building trades workers,
                electricians, plumbers, and painters and perform a variety of general labouring and
                construction tasks.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       9121 LABOURERS IN BUILDING AND WOODWORKING TRADES
  1                    9129 LABOURERS IN OTHER CONSTRUCTION TRADES NEC



                9121 LABOURERS IN BUILDING                                    • performs general labouring tasks such as digging
  2                  AND WOODWORKING                                             trenches and foundations, removing wall
                                                                                 coverings, and preparing surfaces by cleaning,
                     TRADES
                                                                                 sanding, filling, etc.;
                Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
                general labouring and construction duties to assist           • undertakes basic decorating, painting, plumbing,
                building and woodworking trades workers in the                   joinery, and other maintenance and repair tasks.
  3             performance of their tasks.


                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              Builder's labourer
  4             No academic qualifications are required. Training
                                                                              Building worker
                is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in a              Handyman
                variety of construction and craft occupations are             Hod carrier
                available at Levels 1, 2 and 3.

  5                                                                           9129 LABOURERS IN OTHER
                TASKS
                                                                                   CONSTRUCTION TRADES
                • conveys blocks, bricks, stone, mortar, roofing,                  NEC
                   felt, slates, wood and other building materials to
                   the work area;                                             Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
  6             • assists with the erection of ladders, scaffolding
                                                                              labouring occupations in building and civil
                                                                              engineering not elsewhere classified in MINOR
                   and work platforms, the rigging of cradles of
                   hoisting equipment and the attaching of slings,            GROUP 912: Elementary Construction Occupations.
                   hooks and guide ropes;

  7             • mixes mortar, grouting material, cement screed,
                   and plaster, and prepares adhesive, primer and             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                   paints and similar construction material;                  ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                • cleans equipment and tools, clears work area and            There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                   otherwise assists building and woodworking                 Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
  8                trades workers as directed;                                SVQs are available in some areas.




  9

                264      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                     Major Group 9
TASKS

• covers ceilings, floors, walls and exposed
   surfaces of boilers, pipes and plant with
   insulating material;

• lights oil, coal or other heating vessel and breaks
   up blocks of asphalt, bitumen or tar;

• stirs melting mixture, adds aggregate if required,
   pours mixture into buckets and turns off heating;

• measures and fixes timber and other structures
   to support excavations, cables or other rail, signal
   and telecommunications equipment;
                                                                                                                      1
• erects and repairs fencing, excavates, constructs
   and maintains land drainage systems and
   prepares graves for burial;

• operates, cleans and lubricates valves and sluices,                                                                 2
   removes weeds, dead animals and other debris
   from water and carries out minor repairs to banks
   and footbridges.

                                                                                                                      3
RELATED JOB TITLES

Drainage worker
Fence erector
Grave digger
Marquee erector
                                                                                                                      4
Reservoir attendant



                                                                                                                      5


                                                                                                                      6


                                                                                                                      7


                                                                                                                      8


                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   265
Major Group 9



                                       MINOR GROUP 913
                             ELEMENTARY PROCESS PLANT OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this minor group perform a variety of manual tasks in foundry, engineering and
                allied trades, assist the work of machine operatives, clean metal goods, machinery and
                industrial premises, operate printing machines and reprographic equipment, and wrap, fill,
                label and seal containers by hand or machine.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                      9131    LABOURERS IN FOUNDRIES
  1
                      9132    INDUSTRIAL CLEANING PROCESS OCCUPATIONS
                      9133    PRINTING MACHINE MINDERS AND ASSISTANTS
                      9134    PACKERS, BOTTLERS, CANNERS, FILLERS
  2                   9139    LABOURERS IN PROCESS AND PLANT OPERATIONS NEC


                9131 LABOURERS IN FOUNDRIES                                  RELATED JOB TITLES

                Workers in this unit group perform various manual            Foundry labourer
  3             tasks in foundries, engineering and allied trades.           Foundry worker


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                    9132 INDUSTRIAL CLEANING
  4             There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                                                                                  PROCESS OCCUPATIONS

                Training is provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/              Workers in this unit group clean manufactured goods,
                SVQs in Engineering Material Processing are                  plant and machinery, and industrial, commercial and
                available at Level 1.                                        other premises.

  5
                TASKS
                                                                             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                • assists with the charging of furnaces and keeps
                   furnace area or casting bay clean;
                                                                             There are no formal academic entry requirements.
  6             • supplies moulders with sand and/or molten metal,           Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/
                   assists with pouring molten metal into moulds,            SVQs covering various aspects of industrial cleaning
                   removes castings from moulds and conveys them             are available at Levels 1 and 2. Qualifications are
                   to dresser;                                               also offered by the British Institute of Cleaning
                • assists in setting up attachments on plant and             Science.
  7                machinery, helps load metal billets and operates
                   saws, shears or other equipment;
                • removes scale and scrap metal from work area,              TASKS
                   cleans scale from shears, roll and water channels
                   and assists with the cleaning and changing of rolls       • uses industrial hoovering, polishing, pressure
                                                                                washer, steam cleaning and sandblasting
  8                and otherwise assist blast furnace, teeming,
                   rolling, tube making, moulding and casting crews             equipment to clean commercial and industrial
                   as directed.                                                 premises, public buildings and building exteriors;




  9

                266     Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
• dismantles engines, boilers, furnaces and other




                                                                                                                    Major Group 9
                                                         RELATED JOB TITLES
   industrial plant and machinery, cleans component
   parts and reassembles equipment;                      Lithographic machine operator
                                                         Printer's assistant
• washes, rinses, dries and cleans manufactured          Printing machine operator
   goods, and stacks cleaned articles ready for
   removal.
                                                         9134 PACKERS, BOTTLERS,
                                                              CANNERS, FILLERS
RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                         Workers in this unit group pack, wrap, fill, label and
Cleaner (metal goods mfr)                                seal containers by hand or machine.
Hygiene operative                                                                                                    1
                                                         TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
9133 PRINTING MACHINE                                    ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
     MINDERS AND ASSISTANTS                              No academic qualifications are required. Training
Printing machine minders and assistants set and
                                                         is typically provided on-the-job and varies according       2
                                                         to the type of packing and product. Formal courses
operate letterpress, platen or cylinder, lithographic
                                                         are run for specialist packing.
and photogravure printing machines, photocopiers,
office printers, duplication machines and other
reprographic equipment.
                                                         TASKS
                                                                                                                     3
                                                         • selects appropriate cylinder, ensures that there
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      is no corrosion or other damage and fills with
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     gas;

No academic qualifications are required. Off- and        • fills tubes, ampoules, bottles, drums, barrels,
on-the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in                 bags, sacks, cans, boxes and other containers by       4
Screen Printing are available at Levels 1 and 2, and          hand using measuring/weighing aid or by
                                                              positioning container under feeder spout;
in Machine Printing at Levels 2 and 3.
                                                         • packs heavy goods in crates and boxes using
                                                              hoist, mobile crane or similar lifting equipment;
TASKS                                                    • loads machine with packaging containers,
                                                                                                                     5
                                                              materials, adhesive, etc., loads hopper with items
• positions printing plates, loads inks into                  to be packaged/wrapped, monitors filling,
   reservoirs and loads paper rolls or sheets into            wrapping and packaging, adjusts controls as
   printing press;                                            necessary and clears any blockages;
• sets controls to control the speed, pressure and       • examines cans, bottles and seals and rejects any          6
   ink flow of printing machine;                              that are faulty;
• loads photocopiers, office printers, duplication       • labels goods by hand or machine;
   machines and other reprographic equipment with
   stationery;
                                                         • packs specialist items according to specifications
                                                              and completes necessary documentation.                 7
• starts reprographic or printing machine and
   monitors operation for paper misfeeds and error
   messages, removes blockages and replaces              RELATED JOB TITLES
   damaged paper, and monitors quality of output;
                                                         Bottle filler
• sets and operates presses for stamping patterns        Packer                                                      8
   and labels on textiles, clothing, pottery, footwear   Packing machine operator
   and other leather goods.                              Wrapper



                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   267
Major Group 9



                9139 LABOURERS IN PROCESS
                     AND PLANT OPERATIONS
                     NEC
                Workers in this unit group assist the work of machine
                operatives and perform a variety of manual tasks in
                process and plant operations.



                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

  1             No academic qualifications are required. On-the-
                job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs may be
                available in some areas.



  2             TASKS

                • conveys goods, materials, equipment, etc. to
                   work area, assists in setting up machinery and
                   equipment and prepares tools, lamps and other
                   equipment for use;
  3
                • assists operative to mark out, bend, drill,
                   galvanise, coat and otherwise machine metal;

                • loads and unloads vehicles, trucks and trolleys;
  4             • removes finished pieces from work area, paints
                   or fixes identification labels or markers on
                   products or containers;

                • clears machine blockages, cleans machinery,
                   equipment and tools, keeps work area tidy and
  5                clears waste and any spillages;

                • performs a variety of manual tasks in relation to
                   the operation of coke ovens, boilers and blast
                   furnaces.

  6
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Electrician's mate
                Factory hand (engineering)
  7             Fitter's mate
                Labourer (engineering)
                Material handler



  8


  9

                268      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                  Major Group 9
                       MINOR GROUP 914
            ELEMENTARY GOODS STORAGE OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group load and unload cargo from ships, boats and barges, supply
berthed ships with water, oil and fuel, load, unload and convey furniture, goods and other
equipment in and around warehouses, depots and similar establishments, and accompany
motor vehicle and other road vehicle drivers.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       9141 STEVEDORES, DOCKERS AND SLINGERS
                                                                                                                   1
       9149 OTHER GOODS HANDLING AND STORAGE OCCUPATIONS NEC


9141 STEVEDORES, DOCKERS                               RELATED JOB TITLES
     AND SLINGERS
                                                       Dock labourer
                                                                                                                   2
Stevedores, dockers and slingers supply berthed        Dock worker
ships with water, oil and petroleum, attach chains,    Docker
hooks, slings and other grappling attachments to       Port operator
cargo, and load and unload cargo from ships, boats     Slinger
and barges.                                            Stevedore                                                   3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                               9149 OTHER GOODS HANDLING
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                   AND STORAGE
                                                            OCCUPATIONS NEC                                        4
No academic qualifications are required. Off- and
on-the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in          Workers in this unit group convey household and
Cargo Operations are available at Levels 1 and 2.      office furniture, goods, equipment or other items in
                                                       or near warehouses, slaughterhouses, shops, goods
                                                       depots, etc., prepare requisitions or despatch
TASKS                                                  documents of stocks held, accompany drivers of road
                                                                                                                   5
                                                       vehicles, and perform other goods handling and
• attaches hoses to ship's flow connections, starts    storage related tasks not elsewhere classified.
   pump to transfer oil, petroleum or water to and
   from a ship and uncouples hose system when
   loading/discharging is complete;                    TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                    6
                                                       ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
• arranges cargo on quayside or in hold for loading
   or unloading, examines type and weight of load
                                                       There are no formal academic entry requirements.
   to be moved and selects appropriate hook, chain,
                                                       Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
   rope, sling or other grappling attachment;
                                                       SVQs in Distribution and Warehouse Operations are
• attaches winch or crane hooks, slings, ropes or      available at Level 2.
                                                                                                                   7
   clamps to load, signals to crane driver to
   commence lifting, visually checks that load is
   balanced and ensures that route is clear for        TASKS
   movement;
                                                       • loads and unloads goods from removal vans or              8
• removes slings, hooks, clamps or ropes from               delivery vehicles either by hand or using trolleys
   cargo and stows cargo in hold or loads cargo onto        and lift trucks;
   lorries, railway wagons or into warehouses.


                                                                                                                   9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   269
                • packs furniture and household goods into crates
Major Group 9



                   and cartons for storage;

                • undertakes the loading and unloading of goods
                   and conveys goods about storage area;

                • retrieves stored items as listed on order sheets,
                   makes up orders against requisitions and prepares
                   goods for despatch;

                • accompanies driver on journey and assists him/
                   her with manoeuvres such as reversing;

                • secures goods to prevent movement or damage
  1                during journey and assists driver to load and
                   unload vehicle.



                RELATED JOB TITLES
  2
                Store keeper
                Storeman
                Warehouse assistant
                Warehouseman
  3


  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                270      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 9
                SUB-MAJOR GROUP 92
       ELEMENTARY ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE
                   OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this sub-major group collect, sort and deliver written correspondence, undertake
elementary clerical tasks within offices, perform a variety of carrying, preparation and
serving tasks within hospitals, catering, domestic and other establishments, undertake
elementary cleaning tasks, protect and supervise people and property, and perform
elementary sales related tasks.
                                                                                                                    1
                       MINOR GROUP 921
            ELEMENTARY ADMINISTRATION OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group collect, receive, sort and deliver mail, documents,
correspondence or messages and perform a variety of elementary clerical tasks within offices.                       2
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       9211 POSTAL WORKERS, MAIL SORTERS, MESSENGERS, COURIERS
       9219 ELEMENTARY OFFICE OCCUPATIONS NEC
                                                                                                                    3

9211 POSTAL WORKERS, MAIL                               • sorts mail, parcels and other incoming and
                                                             outgoing material for delivery, and maintains
     SORTERS, MESSENGERS,
                                                             records of material received and despatched;           4
     COURIERS
                                                        • delivers mail, parcels, correspondence and other
Workers in this unit group collect, receive, sort and        materials to specified or agreed routes and
deliver mail, documents, correspondence or                   schedules;
messages, either between or within establishments.
                                                        • completes delivery forms, collects charges, and           5
                                                             issues receipts for the collection and delivery of
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                     registered or recorded mail and other items.
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic entry requirements.        RELATED JOB TITLES                                          6
A medical examination may be required. Entrants
complete short induction courses followed by a          Courier
programme of off- and on-the-job training. NVQs/        Dispatch rider
SVQs in Mail Operations are available at Levels 1       Messenger
and 2.                                                  Postal worker
                                                        Postman/woman                                               7
TASKS
                                                        9219 ELEMENTARY OFFICE
• collects mail from post boxes, receives parcels,           OCCUPATIONS NEC
   and collects correspondence, documents and                                                                       8
   other material from individuals, offices or other    Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
   establishments;                                      elementary clerical tasks within offices.



                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   271
Major Group 9


                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
                SVQs in Administration are available at Level 1.



                TASKS

                • copies, duplicates or destroys documents and
                   other records;
  1             • records and retrieves information;
                • compiles, sorts and files correspondence;
                • distributes internal and external correspondence
                   to office staff.
  2
                RELATED JOB TITLES

                Office junior
  3             Office worker
                Paper keeper




  4


  5


  6


  7


  8


  9

                272      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                   Major Group 9
                     MINOR GROUP 922
         ELEMENTARY PERSONAL SERVICES OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group perform manual tasks to assist nursing and domestic staff in
hospitals, assist guests staying at hotels, perform a variety of cleaning, preparation, carrying
and fetching tasks in kitchens, serves food, beverages and alcoholic drinks in catering,
domestic and other establishments, assist in the operation of cinemas, theatres, amusement
arcades, funfairs, theme parks and holiday camps, and perform other elementary personal
service occupations not elsewhere classified.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
                                                                                                                    1
       9221   HOSPITAL PORTERS
       9222   HOTEL PORTERS
       9223   KITCHEN AND CATERING ASSISTANTS
       9224   WAITERS, WAITRESSES                                                                                   2
       9225   BAR STAFF
       9226   LEISURE AND THEME PARK ATTENDANTS
       9229   ELEMENTARY PERSONAL SERVICES OCCUPATIONS NEC
                                                                                                                    3
9221 HOSPITAL PORTERS                                   RELATED JOB TITLES

Hospital porters perform various manual tasks in        Domestic porter (hospital service)
hospitals to assist nursing and domestic staff with     Hospital porter                                             4
the care of patients.


                                                        9222 HOTEL PORTERS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                               Hotel porters meet guests, assist with their luggage
                                                        and direct them to an appropriate room in a hotel or
                                                                                                                    5
There are no formal academic entry requirements.        similar establishment.
Training is provided off- and on-the-job. Entrants
must typically pass a medical examination and may
be required to hold a driving licence.                  TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                        ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                    6
TASKS                                                   There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                                                        Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
• lifts, escorts and wheels patients between hospital   SVQs in Catering and Hospitality (Portering) are
   wards;                                               available at Level 1.                                       7
• assists with the delivery of meals, laundry,
   medical supplies and post to the wards or
   theatres;                                            TASKS

• collects and disposes of refuse from wards and        • meets guests on arrival and assists with their
   other departments;                                        luggage;
                                                                                                                    8
• assists with unloading and delivery of supplies.      • assists in tidying entrance hall;


                                                                                                                    9

                                                        Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   273
                • collects room keys from departing guests and
Major Group 9


                                                                              Counterhand
                   arranges transport where necessary;                        Dining room assistant
                                                                              Kitchen assistant
                • deals with enquiries regarding hotel services and           Kitchen porter
                   local amenities.                                           Washer-up (hotels, catering, public houses)


                RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              9224 WAITERS, WAITRESSES
                Hall porter
                Hotel porter                                                  Waiters and waitresses serve food and beverages in
                House porter                                                  hotels, clubs, restaurants and other establishments.

  1
                9223 KITCHEN AND CATERING                                     TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                     ASSISTANTS                                               ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                Workers in this unit group assist in the preparation          There are no formal academic entry requirements,
  2             and service of food and beverages in restaurants,             though some employers may require GCSEs/S
                cafés and other eating establishments, and perform            grades. Training is typically provided on-the-job.
                various cleaning, fetching and carrying tasks.                NVQs/SVQs in Food and Drink Service are available
                                                                              at Levels 1 and 2.

                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
  3             ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              TASKS
                There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/              • sets tables with clean linen, cutlery, crockery and
                SVQs in Food and Drink Service are available at                  glassware;
                Levels 1 and 2, and in Kitchen Portering at Level 1.
  4                                                                           • presents menus and wine lists to patrons and may
                                                                                 describe dishes and advise on selection of food
                                                                                 or wines;
                TASKS
                                                                              • takes down orders for food and/or drinks and
                • cleans or prepares food for cooks by hand or                   passes order to kitchen;
  5                machine;
                                                                              • serves food and drinks;
                • carries meat, vegetables and other foodstuffs
                   from delivery van to storeroom and from                    • presents bill and accepts payment at end of the
                   storeroom to kitchen;                                         meal.

  6             • cleans and tidies service area, kitchen surfaces,
                   crockery, cutlery, glassware, kitchen utensils and
                   disposes of rubbish;                                       RELATED JOB TITLES

                • prepares and serves beverages and light                     Head waiter/waitress
                   refreshments, accepts payment and gives change;            Waiter/waitress
  7             • keeps service area well stocked.

                                                                              9225 BAR STAFF
                RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              Bar staff prepare, mix and serve alcoholic and non-
  8             Canteen assistant                                             alcoholic drinks and beverages at bars in public
                Catering assistant                                            houses, hotels, clubs and other establishments.




  9

                274      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                          • welcomes holidaymakers, provides information




                                                                                                                     Major Group 9
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                      about holiday camp, organises and participates
                                                               in entertainment and activities for guests.
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Food and Drink Service are available at
                                                          RELATED JOB TITLES
Levels 1 and 2.
                                                          Arcade attendant
                                                          Fairground worker
TASKS                                                     Funfair attendant
                                                          Usher/usherette
• assists in keeping bar properly stocked;
• washes used glassware and cleans bar area;                                                                          1
• takes customer orders and mixes and serves              9229 ELEMENTARY PERSONAL
   drinks;                                                     SERVICES OCCUPATIONS
• receives payment for drinks.                                 NEC
                                                          Workers in this unit group perform a variety of             2
                                                          elementary personal service occupations not
RELATED JOB TITLES                                        elsewhere classified in MINOR GROUP 922:
                                                          Elementary Personal Services Occupations.
Bar assistant
Bar steward/stewardess
Barman/maid/person
                                                          TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                                                                      3
                                                          ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
9226 LEISURE AND THEME PARK                               There are no formal academic entry requirements.
     ATTENDANTS                                           Training is typically received on-the-job.
Leisure and theme park attendants monitor the
                                                                                                                      4
operation of amusement arcades, check tickets of
entry to theatres and cinemas and show people to          TASKS
their seats, operate rides at funfairs and theme parks,
and entertain and look after guests at holiday camps.     • assists in the movement of scenery and other
                                                               stage equipment;                                       5
                                                          • loads numbered balls into bingo machine, starts
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                               machine, removes balls and reads numbers, and
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                               checks winning bingo cards against numbers
                                                               drawn;
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/          • examines and collects tickets at harbours, piers          6
SVQs are available in some areas.                              and similar thoroughfares or establishments not
                                                               elsewhere classified;

TASKS                                                     • collects payment, issues tickets and monitors the
                                                               use of bathing huts, changing rooms, bath houses
• checks tickets of people entering cinemas and                and deck chairs.
                                                                                                                      7
   theatres, and directs people to their seats;

• operates rides and supervises stalls at fairgrounds
   and amusement parks;                                   RELATED JOB TITLES

• issues change at amusement arcades, monitors            Bingo caller                                                8
   the operation of arcade machines and empties           Bingo operative
   coins from machines;                                   Stage hand (entertainment)



                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   275
Major Group 9



                                           MINOR GROUP 923
                                   ELEMENTARY CLEANING OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this minor group clean windows, chimneys, roads, and interiors of buildings,
                wash, dry and press household linen, clean carpets, curtains and similar articles, collect
                refuse from business and private premises, and perform other elementary cleaning tasks
                not elsewhere classified.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       9231    WINDOW CLEANERS
  1
                       9232    ROAD SWEEPERS
                       9233    CLEANERS, DOMESTICS
                       9234    LAUNDERERS, DRY CLEANERS, PRESSERS
  2                    9235    REFUSE AND SALVAGE OCCUPATIONS
                       9239    ELEMENTARY CLEANING OCCUPATIONS NEC


                9231 WINDOW CLEANERS                                          9232 ROAD SWEEPERS
  3
                Window cleaners wash and polish windows and other             Workers in this unit group sweep and remove refuse
                glass fittings.                                               from public thoroughfares and clean soot and
                                                                              deposits from flues and chimneys.


  4             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                      TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                No academic qualifications are required. On-the-              No academic qualifications are required. On-the-
                job training may be available in larger firms. NVQs/          job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in Cleaning:
                SVQs in Cleaning: Windows, Glass and Façade                   Highways and Land are available at Levels 1 and 2.
  5             Surfaces at Level 2 are available.
                                                                              TASKS

                TASKS                                                         • sweeps pavements, gutters and roadways with
                                                                                 hand broom;
  6             • secures ladders and other equipment to gain
                   access to glass;
                                                                              • shovels refuse into containers and empties public
                                                                                 litter bins into containers;
                • selects appropriate cleaning or polishing                   • selects appropriate brush head and pushes it
                   implement;                                                    through flue or chimney, collects soot and other
  7             • washes and polishes glass with brushes, cloths,
                                                                                 dislodged material with brush or vacuum
                                                                                 equipment.
                   water, solvents and squeegees.

                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                RELATED JOB TITLES
  8                                                                           Chimney sweep
                                                                              Road sweeper
                Window cleaner                                                Street cleaner



  9

                276      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                  Major Group 9
9233 CLEANERS, DOMESTICS                               TASKS

Cleaners and domestics clean interiors of private      • receives garment or item from customer for
houses, shops, hotels, schools, offices, other              cleaning, checks pockets, buttons, zips, etc. and
buildings, ships, aircraft, trains and road vehicles        issues receipt;
and wash and polish vehicle exteriors.
                                                       • sorts articles by fabric, colour and type and
                                                            determines appropriate cleaning process;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                               • removes difficult stains using chemicals or steam
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                   gun;
No academic qualifications are required. On-the-job    • loads articles into washing and dry cleaning
training may be provided. NVQs/SVQs in Cleaning:            machines or electrically operated drum cleaning
Building Interiors are available at Levels 1 and 2.         machine, operates controls to admit cleaning           1
                                                            fluids and starts machine;
                                                       • sets and operates tumble drying machines and
TASKS                                                       smoothes and shapes washed garments using
                                                            hand iron or machine press;
• scrubs, washes, sweeps and polishes floors,                                                                      2
   corridors and stairs;                               • allocates washing machines to customers, ensures
                                                            correct use of equipment and gives change;
• dusts and polishes furniture and fittings;
                                                       • performs a variety of laundering, dry cleaning
• cleans toilets and bathrooms;                             and pressing tasks not elsewhere classified,
                                                            including beating carpets and shaping starched
• washes down walls and ceilings;
                                                            collars, cuffs and hats.                               3
• empties ashtrays, waste bins and removes
   rubbish;
                                                       RELATED JOB TITLES
• cleans, polishes and vacuums the interior
   surfaces of motor cars.                             Carpet cleaner
                                                       Dry cleaner
                                                                                                                   4
                                                       Garment presser
RELATED JOB TITLES                                     Hoffman presser
                                                       Laundry assistant
Car valeter                                            Laundry worker
Chambermaid
Cleaner
                                                                                                                   5
Domestic                                               9235 REFUSE AND SALVAGE
Domestic cleaner
                                                            OCCUPATIONS
                                                       Refuse and salvage collectors supervise and
9234 LAUNDERERS, DRY                                   undertake the collection and processing of refuse           6
     CLEANERS, PRESSERS                                from household, commercial and industrial premises.

Launderers, dry cleaners and pressers supervise and
undertake the washing, dry cleaning, ironing and       TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
pressing of household and other linen, carpets and     ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
other articles.                                                                                                    7
                                                       No academic qualifications are required. Training
                                                       is provided on-the-job.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                       TASKS
Academic qualifications may be required. Training
                                                                                                                   8
is mainly on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in Laundering are      • rides in or on refuse vehicle and alights to pick
available at Levels 1 and 2.                                up domestic refuse;


                                                                                                                   9

                                                       Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   277
                • carries waste material in dustbins or other
Major Group 9


                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                   containers from premises to refuse vehicle;
                                                                              Hygiene cleaner
                • empties refuse into vehicle manually or using an            Toilet cleaner
                   electronic tipping device;                                 Wash room attendant
                • returns dustbins or other containers to premises;
                • collects scrap metal, salvage, paper and other
                   recyclable material from domestic and industrial
                   premises, and sorts material in preparation for
                   recycling;

                • attends the operation of refuse tips, supervises
  1                the use of public refuse disposal facilities, and
                   compacts and covers up refuse at landfill sites.



                RELATED JOB TITLES
  2
                Binman/woman (refuse collection)
                Dustman/woman
                Recycling operative
                Refuse collector
  3
                9239 ELEMENTARY CLEANING
                     OCCUPATIONS NEC

  4             Workers in this unit group perform elementary
                cleansing service occupations not elsewhere
                classified in MINOR GROUP 923: Elementary
                Cleaning Occupations.


  5             TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

                No formal academic qualifications are required.
                Training may be provided on-the-job.
  6
                TASKS

                • cleans toilets, washrooms, rest rooms and other
                   similar amenities;
  7
                • replenishes supplies of soap, toilet paper and
                   towels;

                • reports acts of vandalism and any defects in
                   sanitary equipment;
  8
                • completes worksheets to note the date and time
                   that facilities were last cleaned.



  9

                278      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                     Major Group 9
                            MINOR GROUP 924
                    ELEMENTARY SECURITY OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group protect individuals or property from injury, theft or damage,
patrol areas to detect and prevent parking infringements, assist children in crossing roads,
supervise the activities of school children during break and meal times, control the parking
of vehicles in car parks, and perform other elementary security tasks not elsewhere classified.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

       9241    SECURITY GUARDS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
                                                                                                                      1
       9242    TRAFFIC WARDENS
       9243    SCHOOL CROSSING PATROL ATTENDANTS
       9244    SCHOOL MIDDAY ASSISTANTS
       9245    CAR PARK ATTENDANTS                                                                                    2
       9249    ELEMENTARY SECURITY OCCUPATIONS NEC




9241 SECURITY GUARDS AND                                  • monitors and patrols hotels, factories, offices and       3
     RELATED OCCUPATIONS                                      other premises, forests, parks, and public or
                                                              private estates to prevent theft and unauthorised
Workers in this unit group protect merchandise,               entry;
individuals, hotels, offices, factories, public grounds
and private estates from injury, theft or damage.         • checks persons and vehicles entering and leaving          4
                                                              premises, establishes their credentials and
                                                              arranges for escorts for visitors;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                 • receives duty sheet, time-clock and keys for
                                                              premises to be visited, checks locks, doors,
There are no formal academic entry requirements.              windows, etc. and reports any suspicious                5
For some vacancies a current and clean driving                circumstances to security headquarters;
licence is required and entrants may have to pass a
medical examination. Training is typically provided       • calls in civil police and gives evidence in court
on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs covering various aspects                where necessary.
of security guarding are available at Level 2.
                                                                                                                      6
                                                          RELATED JOB TITLES
TASKS
                                                          CCTV operator
• investigates crimes, trading practices and the          Door keeper
   private affairs of individuals;                        Night watcher                                               7
• walks or rides near person requiring protection,        Private detective
   watches for suspicious occurrences and defends         Security officer
   guarded person from attack;                            Store detective

                                                                                                                      8


                                                                                                                      9

                                                          Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   279
Major Group 9



                9242 TRAFFIC WARDENS                                          TASKS

                Traffic wardens patrol assigned areas to detect and           • meets children wanting to cross the road and
                prevent infringements of local parking regulations.              directs them to wait at the kerb;
                                                                              • waits for a safe gap in traffic and walks to the
                                                                                 centre of road;
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     • signals approaching traffic to stop by using hand
                                                                                 signals and school crossing signs;
                There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                                                                              • directs children to cross the road when safe.
                Candidates should be at least 18 years of age (in
                some areas 20-25+) and may be required to pass a
  1             medical examination. Training is typically provided
                                                                              RELATED JOB TITLES
                on-the-job.
                                                                              Lollipop man/lady
                                                                              School crossing patrol officer
                TASKS
  2             • patrols assigned area to detect vehicles parked             9244 SCHOOL MIDDAY
                   in no-parking zones and vehicles parked in excess
                   of permitted time in restricted parking zones;                  ASSISTANTS

                • warns offenders or issues tickets;                          Workers in this unit group supervise the activities of
                                                                              school children during break and meal times.
  3             • advises motorists on local parking facilities and
                   directs them as required;
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                • notes any cases of obstruction, evasion of tax or           ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                   other infringement and reports them to the police;
  4             • gives evidence in court as required.                        There are no formal academic entry requirements.
                                                                              Some employers may expect candidates to show
                                                                              previous experience in caring for children.

                RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                              TASKS
  5             Parking meter attendant
                Traffic warden                                                • supervises the playground activities of children
                Wheel clamper                                                    during meal and break times;
                                                                              • cares for sick children and administers first aid
                                                                                 if necessary;
  6             9243 SCHOOL CROSSING PATROL
                                                                              • sets up and dismantles dining room furniture;
                     ATTENDANTS
                                                                              • assists young children with feeding, dressing,
                School crossing patrol attendants assist children to             washing and toiletry activities.
                cross roads near to the entrances of schools.

  7                                                                           RELATED JOB TITLES
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS                                     Dinner supervisor
                                                                              Lunchtime supervisor
                There are no formal academic entry requirements.              Midday assistant (schools)
  8             Training is provided off- and on-the-job.                     Supervisory assistant (school meals)




  9

                280      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
                                                                                                                    Major Group 9
9245 CAR PARK ATTENDANTS                                 TASKS

Car park attendants control the parking of vehicles      • serves summonses and, on court authority, takes
in public and private car parks, and operate passenger        possession of goods to the value of outstanding
and goods lifts in commercial, industrial, residential        debt;
and other establishments.
                                                         • accepts payment on behalf of court and issues
                                                              receipts;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND                                 • ejects persons in illegal occupation of premises;
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                         • watches for illegal fishing or attempted
No academic qualifications are required. On-the-              smuggling;
job training is provided.
                                                         • deals with any security difficulties in art galleries     1
                                                              and museums, clubs, public houses, employers'
                                                              establishments and other buildings;
TASKS
                                                         • receives clothing, luggage and other articles,
• regulates entry/exit of vehicles to and from car            collects fee and issues ticket and returns item to
                                                                                                                     2
   parks and may park cars;                                   depositor on presentation of receipt.

• issues and examines tickets in car parks, collects
   charges and gives change;
                                                         RELATED JOB TITLES
• operates push-button or hand controls to raise
   and lower lifts to required floor;                    Commissionaire                                              3
                                                         Court bailiff
• ensures safety of goods and passengers carried         Court usher
   in lift.                                              Museum attendant


RELATED JOB TITLES
                                                                                                                     4
Car park attendant
Lift attendant
Parking attendant
                                                                                                                     5
9249 ELEMENTARY SECURITY
     OCCUPATIONS NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of                                                                      6
elementary security occupations not elsewhere
classified in MINOR GROUP 924: Elementary
Security Occupations.



TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                                                                     7
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
For some vacancies a current and clean driving
licence is required and entrants may have to pass a                                                                  8
medical examination. Off- and on-the-job training
may be provided.



                                                                                                                     9

                                                         Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1   281
Major Group 9



                                              MINOR GROUP 925
                                        ELEMENTARY SALES OCCUPATIONS
                Workers in this minor group remove and replace posters from hoardings, bill boards and
                other advertising spaces, replenish stocks of goods in retail establishments, collect and
                issue shopping trolleys and baskets, and perform other elementary sales related tasks.
                Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

                       9251 SHELF FILLERS
  1                    9259 ELEMENTARY SALES OCCUPATIONS NEC



                9251 SHELF FILLERS                                            9259 ELEMENTARY SALES
  2             Shelf fillers receive incoming goods from storage,
                                                                                   OCCUPATIONS NEC
                check them for damage and place them on the                   Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
                appropriate shelves in the store.                             elementary sales related occupations not elsewhere
                                                                              classified in MINOR GROUP 925: Elementary Sales
                                                                              Occupations.
  3
                TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                                                                              TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
                                                                              ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
                There are no minimum academic entry
                requirements. Some on-the-job training may be
  4             provided.
                                                                              There are no minimum academic entry requirements.
                                                                              Some on-the-job training may be provided.


                TASKS                                                         TASKS

  5             • selects goods from storeroom and checks for any             • strips old posters from hoardings and fits new
                   damage;                                                       posters using brushes and working from a ladder
                                                                                 if necessary;
                • checks store layout or written instructions to
                   determine the appropriate shelf location for the           • collects shopping baskets and trolleys in and
                   goods;                                                        around wholesale/retail establishments and
  6                                                                              positions near entrance to store;
                • prices goods by machine and fills shelves with
                   goods;                                                     • offers shopping baskets to customers entering
                                                                                 retail establishments;
                • monitors depletion of stocks and re-fills shelves
                   as required.                                               • uses a pricing gun to attach price labels on goods
  7                                                                              for sale.


                RELATED JOB TITLES                                            RELATED JOB TITLES

                Display assistant (shelf filling)                             Bill poster
  8             Shelf filler                                                  Ticket checker (wholesale, retail trade)
                Stock handler                                                 Trolley collector (wholesale, retail trade)




  9

                282      Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
