OFFICE FOR NATIONAL STATISTICS

STANDARD
OCCUPATIONAL
CLASSIFICATION 2000
Volume 1
Structure and descriptions of unit groups

London: The Stationery Office

About the Office for National Statistics
The Office for National Statistics (ONS) is the Government Agency responsible for compiling,
analysing and disseminating many of the United Kingdom’s economic, social and demographic
statistics, including the retail prices index, trade figures and labour market data, as well as the periodic
census of the population and health statistics. The Director of ONS is also Head of the Government
Statistical Service (GSS) and Registrar-General in England and Wales and the agency carries out all
statutory registration of births, marriages and deaths there.

Editorial policy statement
The Office for National Statistics works in partnership with others in the Government Statistical Service to
provide Parliament, government and the wider community with the statistical information, analysis and advice
needed to improve decision-making, stimulate research and inform debate. It also registers key life events. It
aims to provide an authoritative and impartial picture of society and a window on the work and performance
of government, allowing the impact of government policies and actions to be assessed.

Information services
For general enquiries about official statistics, please contact:
The National Statistics Public Enquiry Service: TEL 020-7533 5888
TEXTPHONE (MINICOM) 01633 812399

Alternatively write to the National Statistics Public Enquiry Service, Zone DG/18, 1 Drummond Gate,
London, SW1V 2QQ. Fax 020 7533 6261or e-mail info@statistics.gov.uk
Most National Statistics publications are published by The Stationery Office and can be obtained from
The Publications Centre, P.O. Box 276, London, SW8 5DT. Tel 0870 600 5522 or fax 0870 600 5333
ONS can be contacted on the Internet at http://www.statistics.gov.uk (from the 7th June 2000)

© Crown copyright 2000. Published with the permission of the Office for National Statistics
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty's Stationery Office.
If you wish to reproduce any items in this publication, contact the ONS Copyright Manager,
Zone B1/09, 1 Drummond Gate, London, SW1V 2QQ. Tel 020 7533 5674 or fax 020 7533 5685.

ISBN 0 11 621388 4

Cover artwork by Shain Bali, onsdesign

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
In the revision and compilation of this classification, the Government Statistical Service
acknowledges the major work undertaken by staff at the Institute for Employment Research:
Professor Peter Elias, Abigail McKnight, Rhys Davies and Margaret Birch.
The work was strongly supported through a Steering Group comprising staff from the
Office for National Statistics, the Department for Education and Employment, the
Employment Service, the Health and Safety Executive, the General Register Office for
Scotland, the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency.
The preparation of this publication was also made possible with the considerable help and
co-operation of many organisations and individuals who commented on consultative
documents, supplied information, and offered constructive suggestions.

Navigate through this PDF by using Bookmarks, Thumbnails or Links.
Bookmarks and Thumbnails can be accessed in the Navigation pane at the left of the screen.
Links are provided between entries in the Contents list, the List of Tables and their respective destinations.

Contents

CONTENTS
Select the HAND tool and click on the title below
to enlarge the text for easier reading.
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1
Page
List of Tables and Figures ............................................................................................... vii
Preface ............................................................................................................................. ix
Introduction....................................................................................................................... 1
General background and introduction .......................................................................... 1
The SOC manual .......................................................................................................... 2
Principles and concepts ................................................................................................ 3
Updating of SOC........................................................................................................ 17
References....................................................................................................................... 18
Structure of the Classification ......................................................................................... 19
Definition of the Major, Sub-major, Minor and Unit Groups of the Classification
Major Group
1. Managers and Senior Officials ............................................................................ 37
2. Professional Occupations .................................................................................... 69
3. Associate Professional and Technical Occupations ........................................... 101
4. Administrative and Secretarial Occupations ..................................................... 155
5. Skilled Trades Occupations ............................................................................... 171
6. Personal Service Occupations ........................................................................... 207
7. Sales and Customer Service Occupations ......................................................... 225
8. Process, Plant and Machine Operatives............................................................. 233
9. Elementary Occupations .................................................................................... 261

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

v

Page

Table 1

Skill levels and the sub-major group structure of SOC2000 and
SOC90

6

Table 2

General Nature of Qualifications, Training and Experience for
Occupations in SOC Major Groups

12

Figure 1

The changing structure of male employment, England and Wales,
1991 and 1996/7: a comparison of SOC90 and SOC2000

15

Figure 2

The changing structure of female employment, England and
Wales, 1991 and 1996/7: a comparison of SOC90 and SOC2000

16

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

vii

List of Tables and Figures

LIST OF TABLES AND FIGURES

Preface

PREFACE
In 1990 the first single classification of occupations was introduced in the United Kingdom.
This classification, known as the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC90), was
subsequently adopted by most government departments and agencies responsible for the
production of occupationally classified information or the processing of occupational data.
Across a wide variety of statistical sources and for many different functions, for example,
vital registration, job matching, analysis of labour market trends, SOC90 has become the
common single classification.
Occupational information serves a variety of purposes. It informs the job matching functions
undertaken by employment agencies, provides career information for leavers from the
educational sectors and other labour market entrants and, via statistical analysis of trends,
yields guidance for the development of labour market policies – especially those which
relate to the promotion of work-based training. While there are substantial benefits to be
gained from using a single classification of occupations for these purposes, these gains
will only continue to be realised if the classification is kept up-to-date. As the pace of
technological progress quickens and as work becomes differently organised, so the
occupational map changes. In many areas of work SOC90 now appears out-of-date. Some
new occupations are difficult to position in the classification, whilst other parts of the
classification are gradually becoming defunct.
Such problems were anticipated when SOC90 was introduced. A decision was made by
the statistical body then responsible1 for SOC90, that new job titles would be positioned in
a revised index to SOC90 and that the structure of the classification would be reviewed
prior to the next Census of Population in 2001. In 1995 a revised index to SOC90 was
published. The present volume completes the review process by revising the structure of
the classification.
The conceptual basis of the classification remains unchanged. Jobs are classified in terms
of their skill level and skill content. Within the context of the classification, ‘skill’ is
defined in terms of the nature and duration of the qualifications, training and work experience
required to become competent to perform the associated tasks in a particular job. The
revision process has focused upon particular areas of the classification where changes in
the organisation of work or in the type of work performed have been most apparent. These
include jobs related to information and communication technologies, culture, media, sports
and leisure. Managerial occupations have also been subject to extensive scrutiny and to
some redefinition in SOC2000 given the extent to which the United Kingdom was found
to be different from other European Union countries in this area of classification. The
terminology of the classification has also been revised thoroughly.

1

Responsibility for the Standard Occupational Classification originally rested with the Central Statistical Office, although the
task of maintaining the classification was given to the (then) Office of Population Censuses and Surveys. Following the
reorganisation of official statistics, responsibility for the classification passed to the Office for National Statistics.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

ix

Preface

Variations in skill requirements will be found from job to job and between different
workplaces. Consequently, not all definitions can be expected to coincide exactly with
specific jobs in any particular establishment or in a given locality. For this reason the
classification should not be regarded as setting any standard or relative level in terms of
pay, hours worked or as a part of the legal regulation of the terms and conditions of
employment.
No single classification system can satisfy the requirements of every potential user. It is
hoped that the straightforward and structured approach adopted in SOC2000 as in SOC90,
and its improved compatibility with the international standard, will ensure that SOC2000
continues to meet the classification needs of users and producers of occupational data.

x

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Introduction

INTRODUCTION
1.

General background and introduction

The Standard Occupational Classification, first introduced in 1990, is maintained by the
Occupational Information Unit (OIU) of the Office for National Statistics (ONS). The
OIU conducts its maintenance functions on a day-by-day basis by responding to user queries,
collecting and collating information on new occupational areas and by developing databases
of occupational information for the purpose of revising the classification. The OIU also
has longer-term responsibilities to prepare and publish revisions to the classification index
and the structure of the classification.
As part of this longer-term work programme, the OIU published a new coding index to
SOC90 in 1995. To prepare for revision of the classification, the OIU began to consult
with users of occupational information in 1996 regarding the need for and the nature of
any potential revision. From this consultation, a number of deficiencies within SOC90
were identified. These were:
• users found it difficult to classify job titles to SOC90. The conceptual principles
of the classification were unclear, leading to ambiguities in the positioning of job
titles within the structure of SOC90;
• in attempting to undertake job-matching work, the Employment Service was
particularly hampered by the broad nature of certain occupational categories. Job
seekers often had quite well-defined job preferences and the Employment Service
had difficulties matching these to vacancy information;
• certain occupational areas were developing rapidly, but were not well-defined in
SOC90. These included information technology occupations, customer service
jobs, conservation and environment-related occupations and a wide range of jobs
in what can loosely be termed ‘caring’ and ‘community work’ occupations.
Pressures to revise SOC90 were arising from other developments. In 1992 the Statistical
Office of the European Communities (Eurostat) commenced a programme of work to
harmonise national occupational classifications across the European Union. This was
achieved by mapping national statistical classifications to an agreed implementation of the
international standard classification, known as ISCO 88(COM). Subsequently, countries
submitted Labour Force Survey and Population Census data to Eurostat classified to this
common standard. Statistical analysis of these data showed that, for the UK, there appeared
to exist a severe definitional problem with the category termed Corporate managers (Elias,
1996). Defined as the managers of organisations and enterprises with 10 employees or
more, the UK had virtually three times the EU average percentage of its workforce classified
to this category. While some variation in occupational structure between EU countries is
to be expected, a difference of this scale was indicative of a significant classification problem.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

1

Introduction

Another source of pressure to reform SOC90 arose from the Review of Social Classifications.
Social class classifications2 have been in use in the UK for a long period, but had developed
in a haphazard and rather unscientific manner. Starting in 1997, and undertaken as a joint
collaboration between the Economic and Social Research Council and the Office for
National Statistics, the Review proposed a conceptual basis for social classification and
undertook a major analytical research programme leading to the development of a new
social classification which uses the unit groups of SOC90 as its main ‘building blocks’3 .
Although the concept of ‘skill’ does not feature explicitly in this classification4, the associated
research and development work revealed a number of issues that could be addressed in its
revision5 .
Following from the OIU consultation process, an interdepartmental body was formed to
consider all of this evidence and to make recommendations regarding the nature of the
revision process. This body concluded that there was a clear indication of a need to update
SOC90. The Institute for Employment Research (IER) at the University of Warwick, in
collaboration with the OIU, was contracted to undertake the work required for revision - a
process which was to be completed by 2000 in preparation for the Census of Population in
2001. However, a number of constraints would regulate the scale of the revision of SOC90.
First, it was recognised that many users were keen to retain as much continuity with SOC90
as possible. Although the inadequacies of SOC90 and the rapid changes in the structure of
jobs would inevitably mean that a revised classification would create some discontinuity,
this desire for continuity translated into a requirement that the conceptual basis of the
classification should not be changed, nor should its major group structure be altered. A
second constraint derived from the need to improve alignment with the International
Standard Classification of Occupations, itself not due for revision before 2008. Besides
these strictures, a more practical consideration acted as a significant constraint on the revision
process - the limited resources available for the work. Earlier classifications had consumed
significant resources in terms of time and money6 . Efficiency gains through access to
large computerised databases were used to offset this comparative reduction in resources
to some extent.
2.

The SOC Manual

The present manual is being published to enable operational users in both research/statistical
and client-oriented applications to use SOC in as consistent a way as possible; and to
enable users of SOC-based occupational statistics to understand the classificatory principles
and coding practices according to which those statistics are produced. The manual is
published as two volumes.

2
3
4
5

6

2

The two main social classifications in the UK are Social Class and Socio-economic Groups.
See Rose and O’Reilly (1998).
See Elias (1997).
A consequence of this process is that the new National Statistics Socio-economic Classification will need to be re-based on
SOC2000. This work is in hand and will be completed during 2000.
The Classification of Occupations and Directory of Occupational Titles (CODOT), introduced in 1972 was preceded by a sixyear programme of data collection and research. SOC90 took four years to develop. SOC2000 had to be completed within two
years.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Volume 2 mainly consists of a detailed alphabetical index of job titles, giving both the
SOC90 and SOC2000 Unit Group to which each is assigned. This is designed for use in
coding occupations. To assist consistent coding some guidance notes are provided on the
way in which the index has been compiled and organised and on how to locate exactly the
right index entry, given the kind of description of the job typically provided by informants.
These notes form the introductory sections to Volume 2.
3.

Principles and concepts

3.1

Types of economic activity classification

In classifying jobs and persons by reference to their economic activity four distinct concepts
are generally recognised and separately measured in standard statistical sources. These
are:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Economic activity status
Occupation
Status in employment
Industry

Economic activity status defines whether the person is or is not at some reference time a
member of the workforce. In practice those in paid employment and those currently looking
for or available for paid employment are classified as economically active and the remainder
as economically inactive. Many economically inactive persons (e.g. most of those wholly
retired from employment) have, of course, had an occupation at some time in the past.
Occupation is most often determined by reference to a person’s main job at the reference
time, but for persons not currently employed may be determined by reference to the most
recent, or most recent main, job. The SOC principles used in classifying occupations are
discussed below.
Status in employment refers to the relationship of a person doing a job to the means of
production (i.e. proprietor or self-employed versus employee); and, for an employee, to
his or her position in the seniority structure of the workplace (e.g. apprentice/trainee,
foreman/supervisor, manager, other employee). Not all these status distinctions are made
in every data source and there have been differences over time and between different

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

3

Introduction

The remainder of Volume 1 comprises the following sections. Section 3 gives a brief
account of some important principles, concepts and conventions according to which SOC
has been developed. Section 4 describes the position on updating SOC. Section 5 sets out
the detailed SOC structure of Unit, Minor, Sub-major and Major Groups. Section 6 gives
a description of each of the groups distinguished and lists job tasks which persons classified
to the group typically carry out and common job titles which are classified to the group.

Introduction

classificatory schemes as to whether certain distinctions should be built into the classification
of occupations or introduced separately.
Industry refers to the economic sector to which the work done in a particular job contributes.
It is usually defined by reference to the main product made or service performed at the
workplace at or from which a job is carried on. Thus the job of a person who is
occupationally a carpenter will be classified industrially to building, if employed by a
building firm, but to brewing, if employed by a brewing firm. Most occupational groups
include jobs located in many different industrial sectors; but there are some cases of
occupations which in practice are associated almost entirely with one particular industry.
In general, classification of occupations to SOC takes no account of information on industry,
but for certain exceptions to this see the Notes on coding included in Volume 2 of the SOC
Manual.
3.2

Objects to be classified and criteria of classification

SOC is designed as a classification applicable to all paid jobs performed by economically
active persons in the United Kingdom. Defined as a set of tasks or duties to be carried out
by one person, the notion of a job represents a basic element in the employment relationship.
Jobs are usually structured by employers (or by the worker in the case of self-employment)
and others, including professional bodies, employer and/or worker organisations and
governments, may regulate their definition. Jobs are recognised primarily by the associated
job title. They are classified into groups according to the concept of ‘skill level’ and ‘skill
specialisation’. As in SOC90, skill level is defined with respect to the
‘…duration of training and/or work experience recognised in
the field of employment concerned as being normally required
to pursue the occupation competently’.
(Employment Department Group/Office of Population
Censuses and Surveys, 1990)
Skill specialisation is defined as the field of knowledge required for competent, thorough
and efficient conduct of the tasks. In some areas of the classification it refers also to the
type of work performed (e.g. materials worked with, tools used, etc.).
Skill levels are approximated by the length of time deemed necessary for a person to become
fully competent in the performance of the tasks associated with a job. This, in turn, is a
function of the time taken to gain necessary formal qualifications or the required amount
of work-based training. Apart from formal training and qualifications, some tasks require
varying types of experience, possibly in other tasks, for competence to be acquired. Within
the broad structure of the classification (major groups and sub-major groups)7 reference
can be made to these four skill levels.
7

4

In common with the 1988 International Standard Classification of Occupations (ILO, 1990), SOC90 and SOC2000 utilise four
levels of aggregation within the classification. These are termed major groups, sub-major groups, minor groups and unit
groups. In SOC2000, as in ISCO-88, these are represented numerically by one, two, three or four digits.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

The second skill level covers a large group of occupations, all of which require the
knowledge provided via a good general education as for occupations at the first skill
level, but which typically have a longer period of work-related training or work
experience. Occupations classified at this level include machine operation, driving,
caring occupations, retailing, and clerical and secretarial occupations.
The third skill level applies to occupations that normally require a body of knowledge
associated with a period of post-compulsory education but not to degree level. A
number of technical occupations fall into this category, as do a variety of trades
occupations and proprietors of small businesses. In the latter case, educational
qualifications at sub-degree level or a lengthy period of vocational training may not
be a necessary prerequisite for competent performance of tasks, but a significant
period of work experience is typical.
The fourth skill level relates to what are termed ‘professional’ occupations and
managerial positions in corporate enterprises or national/local government.
Occupations at this level normally require a degree or equivalent period of relevant
work experience.
Table 1 lists the sub-major groups of SOC2000 and compares these with SOC90. As can
be seen from the names of these sub-major groups, the skill specialisation criterion has
been used to distinguish groups of occupations within each skill level. Thus, for example,
health professionals are distinguished from science and technology professionals and skilled
metal and electrical trades from skilled construction and building trades.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

5

Introduction

The first skill level equates with the competence associated with a general education,
usually acquired by the time a person completes his/her compulsory education and
signalled via a satisfactory set of school-leaving examination grades. Competent
performance of jobs classified at this level will also involve knowledge of appropriate
health and safety regulations and may require short periods of work-related training.
Examples of occupations defined at this skill level within the SOC90 include postal
workers, hotel porters, cleaners and catering assistants.

Introduction

Table 1:

Skill levels and the sub-major group structure of SOC2000 and SOC90

Skill
level

Sub-major groups of:
SOC2000

Level 4

11
21
22
23
24

Level 3

12 Managers and proprietors in agriculture
and services
31 Science and technology associate
professionals
32 Health and social welfare associate
professionals
33 Protective service occupations
34 Culture, media and sports occupations
35
51
52
53
54

Level 2

Corporate managers
Science and technology professionals
Health professionals
Teaching and research professionals
Business and public service professionals

1a
2a
2b
2c
2d

Corporate managers and administrators
Science and engineering professionals
Health professionals
Teaching professionals
Other professional occupations

1b Managers/proprietors in agriculture
and services
3a Science and engineering
associate professionals
3b Health associate professionals

Protective service occupations
Other associate professional
occupations
Business and public service associate
7a Buyers, brokers and sales
professionals
representatives
Skilled agricultural trades
9a Other occupations in agriculture,
forestry and fishing
Skilled metal and electrical trades
5b Skilled engineering trades
Skilled construction and building trades 5a Skilled construction trades
Textiles, printing and other skilled trades 5c Other skilled trades

41
42
61
62

Administrative occupations
Secretarial and related occupations
Caring personal service occupations
Leisure and other personal service
occupations
71 Sales occupations
72 Customer service occupations
81 Process, plant and machine operatives
82 Transport and mobile machine drivers
and operatives

Level 1

SOC90

91 Elementary trades, plant and storage
related occupations
92 Elementary administration and service
occupations

6a
3c

4a Clerical occupations
4b Secretarial occupations
6b Personal service occupations

7b Other sales occupations
8a

Industrial plant and machine
operators, assemblers
8b Drivers and mobile machine
operators
9b Other elementary occupations

Note: Sub-major groups of SOC90 have been listed in the order which best approximates their equivalent
position in SOC2000. It must be stressed however that there is no exact correspondence at this level.

6

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

3.3

The revision of SOC90

From consideration of comments received from users of SOC90, as well as from the work
undertaken in the Review of Social Classifications and the harmonisation activities
conducted for Eurostat, work on the development of SOC2000 was focused in a number
of areas. These were:
Computing and related occupations
Whilst nearly all jobs have been affected in some way by the rapid progress in
information and communication technologies, at the forefront of these are the jobs
which relate directly to the design and implementation of such technologies. It seemed
crucial that this area should be overhauled thoroughly.
Managerial occupations
For a variety of reasons, this area was in need of reform. The apparent inconsistency
in definition of managerial occupations compared with practice in other EU countries
was reason enough for this decision. However, other strands of research evidence
pointed to forces such as ‘de-layering’ of management structures in organisations
and to a potential ‘inflation’ of the use of the title ‘manager’ in jobs which should not
be regarded as managerial8.
Conservation/environmental occupations
Shifting tastes and preferences have led to an increasing demand for environmental
protection and conservation. SOC90 did not recognise many specific occupations
related to these activities within its structure. During consultations undertaken in
the development process, a number of users had expressed particular concern over
this apparent omission.
Skill upgrading/de-skilling within manufacturing processes
Two sets of forces appear to underlie change in occupations that are associated
primarily with the manufacturing process. The continued development of

8

A good example of this is the now frequent use of the title ‘train manager’ for the job known earlier as ‘senior conductor’.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

7

Introduction

Two of the new features of SOC2000 are also apparent from Table 1. First, it can be seen
that the sub-major group structure of SOC2000 is incorporated within the codes used to
describe the classification. The first two digits of the SOC2000 define the major and the
sub-major groups of the classification. This was not the case with SOC90. For this reason,
four digits are now required to describe the full code structure of SOC2000, as opposed to
the 3-digit structure of SOC90. Secondly, the sub-major group structure of SOC2000 now
follows a more regular pattern within the classification. This has been achieved by
repositioning certain sub-major groups within the major group structure according to the
skill level criterion.

Introduction

manufacturing systems which move away from mass production to small batch,
customised production may have stimulated the demand for technically qualified
occupations in production, to facilitate rapid re-tooling and other adjustments to the
equipment used. Simultaneously, the widespread use of computerised production
and control methods may have lessened the need for workers to hold the specialised
skills in many traditional craft occupations.
Customer service occupations
Shifts in consumer tastes and preferences towards a more ‘self-service’ approach,
associated with the wider availability of competitively-priced alternative goods and
services, have stimulated the demand for and supply of after-sales service, quality
testing and assurance and customer ‘loyalty’ schemes to attract and maintain
customers. These developments appear to have given rise to a new set of occupations
in which the associated tasks lie at the interface between the producers or distributors
and the consumers of goods and services.
Remote service provision
Development in information and communication technologies has facilitated the
demand for the provision of services outside ‘normal’ business hours and has
stimulated the development of service provision from remote call centres. Part of
the growth in such demand may be due to latent demand and some may be a function
of increased female labour force participation. The latter trend may have resulted in
a reduction in the availability of one household member to: shop, pay bills, or receive
services related to telephone, electricity, gas, water, etc. during ‘normal’ business
hours. While web-based commercial and informational communications or
transactions may yet supersede these changes,the rapid growth in this area combined
with the scale of employment change suggested the need for specific occupational
categories to identify occupations in this area of work.
Sources of information about the terminology of occupations and the work content of jobs
were available in a variety of sources and formats for the revision of SOC90. By far the
most useful sources were derived from the Census of Population and the Labour Force
Survey. While the 1991 Census of Population is now somewhat dated, its information was
valuable in determining how well SOC90 was operationalised and gave useful information
on the quality of occupational detail obtained from census form-fillers.
The main source available from the 1991 Census of Population was a ½% sample of
individual records for England and Wales. The text response to questions on occupation,
industry and post-schooling qualifications was extracted from approximately 115 thousand
census records and placed into a searchable database. Similar information was extracted
from the 1996/97 Labour Force Survey, covering 63 thousand jobs and consisting of details
such as the job title, main tasks performed in the job and qualifications required for the job.
Other sources of information on occupational descriptions were obtained via the
Employment Service, which generated a database of 291 thousand detailed descriptions of
job vacancies, all coded to SOC90.

8

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Other sources of information, which proved useful in investigating processes of skill change
and to illuminate the definition skill levels, were:
• the ‘371 database’ – an electronic encyclopaedia of statistical information structured
around the 371 unit groups of SOC90 (McKnight and Elias, 1997);
• a database of queries collected over an eight year period from agencies using
SOC90 for coding occupational information;
• recently published material containing detailed descriptions of a wide variety of
jobs (trade journals, newspaper advertising for job vacancies, careers guidance
materials);
• correspondence from interested parties, including trades unions, trade associations,
employers, employer associations and government departments;
• information arising from the detailed scrutiny of SOC90 unit groups by the team
developing the new Social Classification for the UK.
These sources gave much valuable information about the problem areas of the SOC and
yielded a ‘test-bed’ of data for experimentation with the construction of new occupational
categories.
3.4

The structure of SOC2000

This section presents a brief summary of some of the major changes that distinguish
SOC2000 from SOC90.
Major Group 1 (Managers and senior officials)
The change of the name of this major group, from managers and administrators to managers
and senior officials reflects the substantial revision that has been made to this major group.
Many job titles that were indicative of high level clerical work (e.g. administrative assistant)
are now repositioned in major group 4.
New minor and unit groups are now included for quality and customer care managers, and
in the area of Health and Social services. A new unit group exists for natural environment
and conservation managers. In the area of hospitality and leisure services, new unit groups

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

9

Introduction

The Employment Service (ES) was keen to ensure that its interests in occupational
classification for job matching purposes were adequately reflected in the new classification.
To this end, the ES commissioned the IER to undertake a programme of research that
would run parallel to the ONS-led revision of SOC90. This took the form of a review of
the process of job matching and the role played by SOC90 in this process. Through a
series of visits to Job Centres and via the collection of relevant information from a survey
of approximately 80 Job Centres, further information was gained about the requirements
of the ES and the way in which these might be reflected in the revision process.

Introduction

exist for conference and exhibition managers, leisure and sports managers and travel
agency managers. In other service sector areas, managers and proprietors of small retail
establishments are defined more clearly, and a new unit group exists for recycling and
refuse disposal managers.
Major Group 2 (Professional occupations)
In major group 2 new unit groups for information and communication technology
professionals have been created. IT strategy and planning professionals are shown as
distinct from software professionals. All software and programming occupations, which
involve a high level of knowledge of software, networking and the software/hardware
interaction, are now classified to major group 2. Previously these were mainly classified
to major group 3. These decisions also reflect advice and guidance received from industry
training bodies in this area.
Research professionals are now identified according to the type of research they perform.
A new unit group was also created to capture those occupations in the public service which
are essentially administrative in nature, but which require a degree or equivalent level of
experience for competent performance.
Major Group 3 (Associate professional and technical occupations)
In major group 3 new unit groups that have been created to classify IT service delivery
occupations. These are jobs that involve a technical knowledge of IT operations or provide
technical support to users. A new category is shown for paramedics and for medical and
dental technicians. Social welfare associate professionals now distinguish youth and
community workers separately from housing and welfare officers. A separate minor group
was created for therapists, including unit groups for physiotherapists, occupational
therapists and speech and language therapists.
A significant effort was made to develop a better treatment for a large and growing group
of occupations in the arts, literature, media, sports and fitness. Three minor groups and
fourteen unit groups are now used to classify occupations in this area. In the area of
business and finance, a new structure was introduced, following our decision to move
brokers from major group 7 to major group 3. New unit groups are included for conservation
associate professional occupations.
A new minor group was created to facilitate repositioning of a number of unit groups from
within the SOC90 sub-major group, protective service occupations. These include the
armed forces, police officers, fire service officers and prison service officers.
Major Group 4 (Administrative and secretarial occupations)
Major group 4 now classifies a number of administrative occupations that were previously
placed in major group 1. New minor groups were created for administrative occupations
in government and related areas, finance, records, communications and for general clerical
occupations.

10

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Farmers have been relocated here from major group 1 and skilled farm workers from major
group 9.
Major Group 6 (Personal service occupations)
New occupational areas have been defined in major group 6 for childcare and related
personal occupations and for leisure and travel service occupations.
Major Group 7 (Sales and customer service occupations)
In major group 7 a new minor group has been created to classify customer service
occupations.
Major Group 8 (Process, plant and machine operatives)
A particular concern here was to reduce the number of unit groups in this major group,
many that were no longer large enough for statistical purposes due to the decline in this
area of the occupational structure of employment.
Major Group 9 (Elementary occupations)
This major group now includes a significant number of unit groups that have been
repositioned here from other major groups in SOC90. Particular attention is drawn to the
repositioning of bar staff and waiters and waitresses from major group 6 to this major
group. A new minor group has been created for what we term elementary security
occupations.
3.5

Structure of the classification

The major group structure is a set of broad occupational categories which are designed to
be useful in bringing together unit groups which are similar in terms of the qualifications,
training, skills and experience commonly associated with the competent performance of
work tasks. The divisions between major groups also reflect the important aim of aligning
SOC as far as possible with the international classification ISCO 88, in which major groups
are distinguished on similar criteria.
SOC90 had nine major groups, 22 sub-major groups, 77 minor groups and 371 unit groups.
SOC2000 has nine major groups, 25 sub-major groups, 81 minor groups and 353 unit
groups.
Table 2 shows the nine major groups of SOC, defined in terms of the general nature of the
qualifications, training and experience associated with competent performance of tasks in
the occupations classified within each major group.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

11

Introduction

Major Group 5 (Skilled trades occupations)

Introduction

Table 2:

General Nature of Qualifications, Training and
Experience for Occupations in SOC Major Groups

Major Group

General Nature of Qualifications, Training and
Experience for Occupations in the Major Group

Managers and
Senior Officials

A significant amount of knowledge and experience of the production processes
and service requirements associated with the efficient functioning of
organisations and businesses.

Professional
Occupations

A degree or equivalent qualification, with some occupations requiring
postgraduate qualifications and/or a formal period of experience-related
training.

Associate Professional
and Technical
Occupations

An associated high-level vocational qualification, often involving a
substantial period of full-time training or further study. Some additional taskrelated training is usually provided through a formal period of induction.

Administrative and
Secretarial
Occupations

A good standard of general education. Certain occupations will require
further additional vocational training to a well defined standard (e.g. typing
or shorthand).

Skilled Trades
Occupations

A substantial period of training, often provided by means of a workbased training programme.

Personal Service
Occupations

A good standard of general education. Certain occupations will require further
additional vocational training, often provided by means of a work-based
training programme.

Sales and Customer
Service Occupations

A general education and a programme of work-based training related to sales
procedures. Some occupations require additional specific technical knowledge
but are included in this major group because the primary task involves selling.

Process, Plant and
Machine Operatives

The knowledge and experience necessary to operate vehicles and other mobile
and stationary machinery, to operate and monitor industrial plant and
equipment, to assemble products from component parts according to strict
rules and procedures and subject assembled parts to routine tests. Most
occupations in this major group will specify a minimum standard of
competence that must be attained for satisfactory performance of the associated
tasks and will have an associated period of formal experience-related training.

Elementary Occupations

Occupations classified at this level will usually require a minimum general
level of education (i.e. that which is provided by the end of the period of
compulsory education). Some occupations at this level will also have short
periods of work-related training in areas such as health and safety, food
hygiene, and customer service requirements.

12

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

The impact of reclassification

To gain some indication of the potential impact of these and a wide variety of other changes
on the definition of occupational structure, the Occupation Information Unit reclassified a
½% sample of the 1991 Census of Population for England and Wales which was originally
coded to SOC90. While this is a guide to the potential impact of SOC2000 in terms of the
measurement of occupational structure, these comparisons must be treated with a degree
of caution. The most obvious point to make is that the Census took place almost a decade
ago. Many of the new categories in SOC2000 may now be populated quite differently.
Furthermore, the process of reclassifying data is different from the process of coding. The
former involves much expert judgement and discussion. The latter is a more routine process
that, by its nature, is error prone. To address these issues, a single quarter of the Labour
Force Survey (Winter 1996/7) was re-coded. The coding procedures adopted were somewhat
different from the original9 and the coding to SOC2000 unit groups was performed without
reference to the original SOC90 unit group codes.
Figures 1 and 2 show, for males and females separately, changes in the occupational structure
of employment in England and Wales between 1991 and 1996/7, with employment classified
to the major group structure of SOC90 and SOC2000. In both of these charts four
overlapping bars are shown for each major group, indicating the percentage of total
employment in the major group. The two bars placed furthest back show the occupational
structure as recorded in 1991, by SOC90 then by SOC2000. The two bars to the front of
each group reveal how these percentages have changed by Winter 1996/7.
There are a number of areas where the move to SOC2000 will have a marked impact upon
the perception of the occupational structure of employment. In major group 1 (Managers
and Senior Officials) the tightening of the definition of managers reduces the size of this
category significantly, especially for females (4 per cent reduction for females and 2 per
cent reduction for males). Major group 3 (Associate Professional and Technical
Occupations) increases in size, more so for men than for women. Major group 4
(Administrative and Secretarial Occupations) declines significantly for males and slightly
for females. Major group 6 (Personal Service Occupations) declines sharply for males, by
almost three-quarters, and by about a quarter for females. The shift of waiters, waitresses
and bar staff to major group 9 (Elementary Occupations) has a marked effect upon the size
of this major group, which rises from 8 per cent of male employment to over 12 per cent
and from 9 per cent of female employment to over 16 per cent.
The effect of moving from SOC90 to SOC2000 is almost identical when comparing the
1991 Census data with the Winter 1996/7 quarter of the Labour Force Survey. Although
changes in occupational structure are apparent between 1991 and 1996/7, notably the decline
in skilled trades occupations for males and the decline in administrative, clerical and
secretarial occupations for females, the relative effect of moving from the old to the new
classification remains the same for each period. There is one exception however. For
9

The Labour Force Survey is coded by interviewers upon completion of a batch of interviews. The recoding of this same data to
SOC2000 was undertaken by a small centralised team of office coders.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

13

Introduction

3.6

Introduction

females, SOC90 appeared to indicate a slight decline in the proportion of employment
classified to Major group 1 (Managers and Senior Officials) between 1991 and 1996/7.
Redefinition of this group to exclude administrative occupations reveals some underlying
growth in the more narrowly defined managerial category.

14

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Updating of SOC

Changes occur in work organisation as a result of technological developments, use of new
materials, improved methods of production or delivery of services etc. New occupations
arise either because tasks are enlarged, contracted or combined within and between existing
occupations or because new, different tasks are introduced into the organisation of work.
Such new occupations may become sufficiently important to warrant their recognition and
inclusion in the classification. Additionally, new index entries for Volume 2 may be required.
The Occupational Information Unit, of the Office for National Statistics, set up to support
SOC, would welcome information on such changes. This will be taken into account in the
periodical updating of SOC. For SOC90 we published an updated edition of Volume 2 in
1995. For SOC2000 we are considering the production of more frequent updates to the
index, not in printed form, but to the index file held electronically.
Please contact:
Occupational Information Unit
Office for National Statistics
Segensworth Road
Titchfield
Fareham
Hampshire
PO15 5RR
Telephone 01329 813640
Facsimile 01329 813532
Email occupation.information@ons.gov.uk
For all other statistical enquiries:
Telephone 020 7533 5888
Email info@ons.gov.uk

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

17

Introduction

4.

Introduction

References
Elias, P. (1996). Occupational classification (ISCO88): concepts, methods, reliability
validity and cross-national comparability. OECD working paper DEELSA/ELSA/
WP7(96)7. Paris: OECD.
Elias, P. (1997). ‘Social Class and the Standard Occupational Classification’. Chapter 2 in
Rose, D, and K. O’Reilly (eds.).
Employment Department Group/Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (1990).
Standard Occupational Classification. Volume 1. London: HMSO.
International Labour Office (1990). International Standard Classification of Occupations,
ISCO-88. Geneva, International Labour Office.
McKnight, A. and P. Elias (1997). ‘A database of information on unit groups of the Standard
Occupational Classification’. Chapter 9 in D. Rose and K. O’Reilly (eds.) Constructing
Classes: towards a new social classification for the UK. Swindon: ESRC/ONS.
Rose, D. and O’Reilly, K. (eds.) (1997). Constructing Classes: towards a new social
classification for theUK. Swindon: ESRC/ONS.
Rose, D. and K. O’Reilly (eds.) (1998). Final report of the ESRC Review of Government
Social Classifications. Swindon: ESRC.

18

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Summary of Structure

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 (SOC2000)
Summary of Structure
The Standard Occupational Classification consists of the following major groups:
1

Managers and Senior Officials

2

Professional Occupations

3

Associate Professional and Technical Occupations

4

Administrative and Secretarial Occupations

5

Skilled Trades Occupations

6

Personal Service Occupations

7

Sales and Customer Service Occupations

8

Process, Plant and Machine Operatives

9

Elementary Occupations

The sub-major, minor group and unit group structure of these major groups is defined as
follows:

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

19

Summary of Structure

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 (SOC2000)
Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

1

Group Title

MANAGERS AND SENIOR OFFICIALS
11

CORPORATE MANAGERS
111

Corporate Managers And Senior Officials
1111
1112
1113
1114

112

Senior officials in national government
Directors and chief executives of major organisations
Senior officials in local government
Senior officials of special interest organisations
Production Managers

1121
1122
1123
113

Production, works and maintenance managers
Managers in construction
Managers in mining and energy
Functional Managers

1131
1132
1133
1134
1135
1136
1137
114

Financial managers and chartered secretaries
Marketing and sales managers
Purchasing managers
Advertising and public relations managers
Personnel, training and industrial relations managers
Information and communication technology managers
Research and development managers
Quality And Customer Care Managers

1141
1142
115

Quality assurance managers
Customer care managers
Financial Institution And Office Managers

1151
1152
116

Financial institution managers
Office managers
Managers In Distribution, Storage And Retailing

1161
1162
1163

Transport and distribution managers
Storage and warehouse managers
Retail and wholesale managers

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

21

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

117

Protective Service Officers
1171
1172
1173
1174

118

Officers in armed forces
Police officers (inspectors and above)
Senior officers in fire, ambulance, prison and related
services
Security managers
Health And Social Services Managers

1181
1182
1183
1184
1185
12

Hospital and health service managers
Pharmacy managers
Healthcare practice managers
Social services managers
Residential and day care managers
MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN
AGRICULTURE AND SERVICES

121

Managers In Farming, Horticulture, Forestry And
Fishing
1211
1212
1219

122

Farm managers
Natural environment and conservation managers
Managers in animal husbandry, forestry and fishing n.e.c.
Managers And Proprietors In Hospitality And Leisure
Services

1221
1222
1223
1224
1225
1226
123

Hotel and accommodation managers
Conference and exhibition managers
Restaurant and catering managers
Publicans and managers of licensed premises
Leisure and sports managers
Travel agency managers
Managers And Proprietors In Other Service
Industries

1231
1232
1233
1234
1235
1239

22

Group Title

Property, housing and land managers
Garage managers and proprietors
Hairdressing and beauty salon managers and proprietors
Shopkeepers and wholesale/retail dealers
Recycling and refuse disposal managers
Managers and proprietors in other services n.e.c.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

2

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Group Title

PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATIONS
21

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROFESSIONALS
211

Science Professionals
2111
2112
2113

212

Chemists
Biological scientists and biochemists
Physicists, geologists and meteorologists
Engineering Professionals

2121
2122
2123
2124
2125
2126
2127
2128
2129
213

Civil engineers
Mechanical engineers
Electrical engineers
Electronics engineers
Chemical engineers
Design and development engineers
Production and process engineers
Planning and quality control engineers
Engineering professionals n.e.c.
Information And Communication Technology
Professionals

2131
2132
22

IT strategy and planning professionals
Software professionals
HEALTH PROFESSIONALS

221

Health Professionals
2211
2212
2213
2214
2215
2216

23

Medical practitioners
Psychologists
Pharmacists/pharmacologists
Ophthalmic opticians
Dental practitioners
Veterinarians
TEACHING AND RESEARCH PROFESSIONALS

231

Teaching Professionals
2311
2312
2313
2314
2315
2316
2317
2319

Higher education teaching professionals
Further education teaching professionals
Education officers, school inspectors
Secondary education teaching professionals
Primary and nursery education teaching professionals
Special needs education teaching professionals
Registrars and senior administrators of educational
establishments
Teaching professionals n.e.c.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

23

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

232

Research Professionals
2321
2322
2329

24

Scientific researchers
Social science researchers
Researchers n.e.c.
BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE
PROFESSIONALS

241

Legal Professionals
2411
2419

242

Solicitors and lawyers, judges and coroners
Legal professionals n.e.c.
Business And Statistical Professionals

2421
2422
2423

243

Chartered and certified accountants
Management accountants
Management consultants, actuaries, economists and
statisticians
Architects, Town Planners, Surveyors

2431
2432
2433
2434
244

Architects
Town planners
Quantity surveyors
Chartered surveyors (not quantity surveyors)
Public Service Professionals

2441
2442
2443
2444

Public service administrative professionals
Social workers
Probation officers
Clergy

2451
2452

Librarians And Related Professionals
Librarians
Archivists and curators

245

24

Group Title

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

3

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Group Title

ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL
OCCUPATIONS
31

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS
311

Science And Engineering Technicians
3111
3112
3113
3114
3115
3119

312

Laboratory technicians
Electrical/electronics technicians
Engineering technicians
Building and civil engineering technicians
Quality assurance technicians
Science and engineering technicians n.e.c.
Draughtspersons And Building Inspectors

3121
3122
3123
313

Architectural technologists and town planning technicians
Draughtspersons
Building inspectors
IT Service Delivery Occupations

3131
3132
32

IT operations technicians
IT user support technicians
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS

321

Health Associate Professionals
3211
3212
3213
3214
3215
3216
3217
3218

322

Nurses
Midwives
Paramedics
Medical radiographers
Chiropodists
Dispensing opticians
Pharmaceutical dispensers
Medical and dental technicians
Therapists

3221
3222
3223
3229
323

Physiotherapists
Occupational therapists
Speech and language therapists
Therapists n.e.c.
Social Welfare Associate Professionals

3231
3232

Youth and community workers
Housing and welfare officers

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

25

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

33

PROTECTIVE SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
331

Protective Service Occupations
3311
3312
3313
3314
3319

34

NCOs and other ranks
Police officers (sergeant and below)
Fire service officers (leading fire officer and below)
Prison service officers (below principal officer)
Protective service associate professionals n.e.c.
CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORTS OCCUPATIONS

341

Artistic And Literary Occupations
3411
3412
3413
3414
3415
3416

342

Artists
Authors, writers
Actors, entertainers
Dancers and choreographers
Musicians
Arts officers, producers and directors
Design Associate Professionals

3421
3422
343

Graphic designers
Product, clothing and related designers
Media Associate Professionals

3431
3432
3433
3434
344

Journalists, newspaper and periodical editors
Broadcasting associate professionals
Public relations officers
Photographers and audio-visual equipment operators
Sports And Fitness Occupations

3441
3442
3443
3449
35

Sports players
Sports coaches, instructors and officials
Fitness instructors
Sports and fitness occupations n.e.c.
BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS

351

Transport Associate Professionals
3511
3512
3513
3514

26

Group Title

Air traffic controllers
Aircraft pilots and flight engineers
Ship and hovercraft officers
Train drivers

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

352

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Group Title

Legal Associate Professionals
3520

353

Legal associate professionals
Business And Finance Associate Professionals

3531
3532
3533
3534
3535
3536
3537
3539
354

Estimators, valuers and assessors
Brokers
Insurance underwriters
Finance and investment analysts/advisers
Taxation experts
Importers, exporters
Financial and accounting technicians
Business and related associate professionals n.e.c.
Sales And Related Associate Professionals

3541
3542
3543
3544
355

Buyers and purchasing officers
Sales representatives
Marketing associate professionals
Estate agents, auctioneers
Conservation Associate Professionals

3551
3552
356

Conservation and environmental protection officers
Countryside and park rangers
Public Service And Other Associate Professionals

3561
3562
3563
3564
3565
3566
3567
3568

Public service associate professionals
Personnel and industrial relations officers
Vocational and industrial trainers and instructors
Careers advisers and vocational guidance specialists
Inspectors of factories, utilities and trading standards
Statutory examiners
Occupational hygienists and safety officers (health and
safety)
Environmental health officers

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

27

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

4

ADMINISTRATIVE AND SECRETARIAL
OCCUPATIONS
41

ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS
411

Administrative Occupations: Government And
Related Organisations
4111
4112
4113
4114

412

Civil Service executive officers
Civil Service administrative officers and assistants
Local government clerical officers and assistants
Officers of non-governmental organisations
Administrative Occupations: Finance

4121
4122
4123
413

Credit controllers
Accounts and wages clerks, book-keepers, other financial
clerks
Counter clerks
Administrative Occupations: Records

4131
4132
4133
4134
4135
4136
4137
414

Filing and other records assistants/clerks
Pensions and insurance clerks
Stock control clerks
Transport and distribution clerks
Library assistants/clerks
Database assistants/clerks
Market research interviewers
Administrative Occupations: Communications

4141
4142
415

Telephonists
Communication operators
Administrative Occupations: General

4150
42

General office assistants/clerks
SECRETARIAL AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS

421

Secretarial And Related Occupations
4211
4212
4213
4214
4215
4216
4217

28

Group Title

Medical secretaries
Legal secretaries
School secretaries
Company secretaries
Personal assistants and other secretaries
Receptionists
Typists

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

5

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Group Title

SKILLED TRADES OCCUPATIONS
51

SKILLED AGRICULTURAL TRADES
511

Agricultural Trades
5111
5112
5113
5119

52

Farmers
Horticultural trades
Gardeners and groundsmen/groundswomen
Agricultural and fishing trades n.e.c.
SKILLED METAL AND ELECTRICAL TRADES

521

Metal Forming, Welding And Related Trades
5211
5212
5213
5214
5215
5216

522

Smiths and forge workers
Moulders, core makers, die casters
Sheet metal workers
Metal plate workers, shipwrights, riveters
Welding trades
Pipe fitters
Metal Machining, Fitting And Instrument Making
Trades

5221
5222
5223
5224
523

Metal machining setters and setter-operators
Tool makers, tool fitters and markers-out
Metal working production and maintenance fitters
Precision instrument makers and repairers
Vehicle Trades

5231
5232
5233
5234
524

Motor mechanics, auto engineers
Vehicle body builders and repairers
Auto electricians
Vehicle spray painters
Electrical Trades

5241
5242
5243
5244
5245
5249

Electricians, electrical fitters
Telecommunications engineers
Lines repairers and cable jointers
TV, video and audio engineers
Computer engineers, installation and maintenance
Electrical/electronics engineers n.e.c.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

29

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

53

SKILLED CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING
TRADES
531

Construction Trades
5311
5312
5313
5314
5315
5316
5319

532

Steel erectors
Bricklayers, masons
Roofers, roof tilers and slaters
Plumbers, heating and ventilating engineers
Carpenters and joiners
Glaziers, window fabricators and fitters
Construction trades n.e.c.
Building Trades

5321
5322
5323
54

Plasterers
Floorers and wall tilers
Painters and decorators
TEXTILES, PRINTING AND OTHER SKILLED
TRADES

541

Textiles And Garments Trades
5411
5412
5413
5414
5419

542

Weavers and knitters
Upholsterers
Leather and related trades
Tailors and dressmakers
Textiles, garments and related trades n.e.c.
Printing Trades

5421
5422
5423
5424
543

Originators, compositors and print preparers
Printers
Bookbinders and print finishers
Screen printers
Food Preparation Trades

5431
5432
5433
5434
549

Butchers, meat cutters
Bakers, flour confectioners
Fishmongers, poultry dressers
Chefs, cooks
Skilled Trades n.e.c.

5491
5492
5493
5494
5495
5496
5499

30

Group Title

Glass and ceramics makers, decorators and finishers
Furniture makers, other craft woodworkers
Pattern makers (moulds)
Musical instrument makers and tuners
Goldsmiths, silversmiths, precious stone workers
Floral arrangers, florists
Hand craft occupations n.e.c.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

6

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Group Title

PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
61

CARING PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
611

Healthcare And Related Personal Services
6111
6112
6113
6114
6115

612

Nursing auxiliaries and assistants
Ambulance staff (excluding paramedics)
Dental nurses
Houseparents and residential wardens
Care assistants and home carers
Childcare And Related Personal Services

6121
6122
6123
6124
613

Nursery nurses
Childminders and related occupations
Playgroup leaders/assistants
Educational assistants
Animal Care Services

6131
6139
62

Veterinary nurses and assistants
Animal care occupations n.e.c.
LEISURE AND OTHER PERSONAL SERVICE
OCCUPATIONS

621

Leisure And Travel Service Occupations
6211
6212
6213
6214
6215
6219

622

Sports and leisure assistants
Travel agents
Travel and tour guides
Air travel assistants
Rail travel assistants
Leisure and travel service occupations n.e.c.
Hairdressers And Related Occupations

6221
6222
623

Hairdressers, barbers
Beauticians and related occupations
Housekeeping Occupations

6231
6232
629

Housekeepers and related occupations
Caretakers
Personal Services Occupations n.e.c.

6291
6292

Undertakers and mortuary assistants
Pest control officers

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

31

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

7

SALES AND CUSTOMER SERVICE
OCCUPATIONS
71

SALES OCCUPATIONS
711

Sales Assistants And Retail Cashiers
7111
7112
7113

712

Sales and retail assistants
Retail cashiers and check-out operators
Telephone salespersons
Sales Related Occupations

7121
7122
7123
7124
7125
7129
72

Collector salespersons and credit agents
Debt, rent and other cash collectors
Roundsmen/women and van salespersons
Market and street traders and assistants
Merchandisers and window dressers
Sales related occupations n.e.c.
CUSTOMER SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

721

Customer Service Occupations
7211
7212

32

Group Title

Call centre agents/operators
Customer care occupations

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

8

Group Title

PROCESS, PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES
81

PROCESS, PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES
811

Process Operatives
8111
8112
8113
8114
8115
8116
8117
8118
8119

812

Food, drink and tobacco process operatives
Glass and ceramics process operatives
Textile process operatives
Chemical and related process operatives
Rubber process operatives
Plastics process operatives
Metal making and treating process operatives
Electroplaters
Process operatives n.e.c.
Plant And Machine Operatives

8121
8122
8123
8124
8125
8126
8129
813

Paper and wood machine operatives
Coal mine operatives
Quarry workers and related operatives
Energy plant operatives
Metal working machine operatives
Water and sewerage plant operatives
Plant and machine operatives n.e.c.
Assemblers And Routine Operatives

8131
8132
8133
8134
8135
8136
8137
8138
8139
814

Assemblers (electrical products)
Assemblers (vehicles and metal goods)
Routine inspectors and testers
Weighers, graders, sorters
Tyre, exhaust and windscreen fitters
Clothing cutters
Sewing machinists
Routine laboratory testers
Assemblers and routine operatives n.e.c.
Construction Operatives

8141
8142
8143
8149
82

Scaffolders, stagers, riggers
Road construction operatives
Rail construction and maintenance operatives
Construction operatives n.e.c.
TRANSPORT AND MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS
AND OPERATIVES

821

Transport Drivers And Operatives
8211
8212
8213
8214
8215

Heavy goods vehicle drivers
Van drivers
Bus and coach drivers
Taxi, cab drivers and chauffeurs
Driving instructors

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

33

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

Group Title

8216
8217

Rail transport operatives
Seafarers (merchant navy); barge, lighter and boat
operatives
Air transport operatives
Transport operatives n.e.c.

8218
8219
822

Mobile Machine Drivers And Operatives
8221
8222
8223
8229

34

Crane drivers
Fork-lift truck drivers
Agricultural machinery drivers
Mobile machine drivers and operatives n.e.c.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

9

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Group Title

ELEMENTARY OCCUPATIONS
91

ELEMENTARY TRADES, PLANT AND STORAGE
RELATED OCCUPATIONS
911

Elementary Agricultural Occupations
9111
9112
9119

912

Farm workers
Forestry workers
Fishing and agriculture related occupations n.e.c.
Elementary Construction Occupations

9121
9129
913

Labourers in building and woodworking trades
Labourers in other construction trades n.e.c.
Elementary Process Plant Occupations

9131
9132
9133
9134
9139
914

Labourers in foundries
Industrial cleaning process occupations
Printing machine minders and assistants
Packers, bottlers, canners, fillers
Labourers in process and plant operations n.e.c.
Elementary Goods Storage Occupations

9141
9149

92

Stevedores, dockers and slingers
Other goods handling and storage occupations n.e.c.

ELEMENTARY ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE
OCCUPATIONS
921

Elementary Administration Occupations
9211
9219

922

Postal workers, mail sorters, messengers, couriers
Elementary office occupations n.e.c.
Elementary Personal Services Occupations

9221
9222
9223
9224
9225
9226
9229

Hospital porters
Hotel porters
Kitchen and catering assistants
Waiters, waitresses
Bar staff
Leisure and theme park attendants
Elementary personal services occupations n.e.c.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

35

Summary of Structure

Major
Group

Sub-Major
Group

Minor
Group

Unit
Group

923

Elementary Cleaning Occupations
9231
9232
9233
9234
9235
9239

924

Window cleaners
Road sweepers
Cleaners, domestics
Launderers, dry cleaners, pressers
Refuse and salvage occupations
Elementary cleaning occupations n.e.c.
Elementary Security Occupations

9241
9242
9243
9244
9245
9249
925

Security guards and related occupations
Traffic wardens
School crossing patrol attendants
School mid-day assistants
Car park attendants
Elementary security occupations n.e.c.
Elementary Sales Occupations

9251
9259

36

Group Title

Shelf fillers
Elementary sales occupations n.e.c.

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

This major group covers occupations whose main tasks consist of the direction and coordination of the functioning of organisations and businesses, including internal departments
and sections, often with the help of subordinate managers and supervisors. Working
proprietors in small businesses are included, although allocated to separate minor groups
within the major group.
Most occupations in this major group will require a significant amount of knowledge and
experience of the production processes, administrative procedures or service requirements
associated with the efficient functioning of organisations and businesses.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:

Major Group 1

MAJOR GROUP 1
MANAGERS AND SENIOR OFFICIALS

1

2

11 CORPORATE MANAGERS
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118

CORPORATE MANAGERS AND SENIOR OFFICIALS
PRODUCTION MANAGERS
FUNCTIONAL MANAGERS
QUALITY AND CUSTOMER CARE MANAGERS
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION AND OFFICE MANAGERS
MANAGERS IN DISTRIBUTION, STORAGE AND RETAILING
PROTECTIVE SERVICE OFFICERS
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES MANAGERS

3

4

5

12 MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN AGRICULTURE AND
SERVICES
121
122
123

MANAGERS IN FARMING, HORTICULTURE, FORESTRY AND
FISHING
MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN HOSPITALITY AND LEISURE
SERVICES
MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN OTHER SERVICE
INDUSTRIES

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

37

Major Group 1

1

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 11
CORPORATE MANAGERS
Job holders in this sub-major group formulate government policy; direct the operations of
major organisations, government departments and special interest organisations; organise
and direct production, processing, maintenance and construction operations in industry;
formulate, implement and advise on specialist functional activities within organisations;
direct the operations of branches and offices of financial institutions; organise and coordinate the transportation of passengers, the storage and distribution of freight, and the
sale of goods; manage the operations of the emergency services, customs and excise, the
prison service and the armed forces; and co-ordinate the provision of health and social care
services and establishments.

MINOR GROUP 111
CORPORATE MANAGERS AND SENIOR OFFICIALS

2

3

Job holders in this minor group formulate national and local government policy; plan,
organise and direct government departments and plan and organise (usually with other
managers) the operations of large companies and organisations employing over 500 people.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
1111 SENIOR OFFICIALS IN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
1112 DIRECTORS AND CHIEF EXECUTIVES OF MAJOR
ORGANISATIONS
1113 SENIOR OFFICIALS IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT
1114 SENIOR OFFICIALS OF SPECIAL INTEREST ORGANISATIONS

4

5
1111 SENIOR OFFICIALS IN
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

6

7

Job holders in this unit group formulate and ratify
legislation and government policy, act as elected
representatives of either Parliament, European
Parliament, Regional Parliaments or Assemblies, act
as representatives of the government and direct the
diplomatic operations of government departments.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8

Entry is either by appointment, election or internal
promotion.

9
38

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

TASKS

• evaluates departmental activities, discusses
problems with government officials and
administrators, notes national and international
opinion and formulates departmental policy;

• recommends or reviews potential policy or
legislation and offers advice and opinions on
current policy;

• investigates matters of concern to the general
public or particular groups and recommends
government action where appropriate;

• advises on interpretation and implementation of
policy decisions, acts and regulations;

Major Group 1

• tables questions to ministers and introduces

RELATED JOB TITLES

proposals for government action.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Assistant secretary/Grade 5 (government)
Diplomat
Member of European Parliament
Member of Parliament
Permanent secretary (government)

1112 DIRECTORS AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVES OF MAJOR
ORGANISATIONS
Workers in this unit group head large enterprises and
organisations employing over 500 people at single
or multiple site establishments. They plan, direct
and co-ordinate, with other managers, the resources
necessary for operations such as processing,
production, construction, maintenance, transport,
storage, handling and warehousing, the resources of
offices performing clerical and related functions and
the specialist activities of enterprises and
organisations not elsewhere classified.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is either by appointment, election or internal
promotion.

Chief executive (major organisation)
Company director (major organisation)
Director (major organisation)
General manager (major organisation)
Managing director (major organisation)

1113 SENIOR OFFICIALS IN
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Workers in this unit group participate in the
formulation and implementation of local government
policies, ensure that legal, statutory and other
provisions concerning the running of a local authority
are observed, organise local authority office work
and resources.

• analyses economic, social, legal and other data
and plans, formulates and directs the operation
of a company or organisation;

• consults with subordinates to formulate,
implement and review company policy;

• prepares, or arranges for the preparation of

There are no pre-set entry requirements. Candidates
are recruited with a variety of academic
qualifications or with relevant experience. Entry is
also possible by internal promotion.

3

TASKS

4

• evaluates departmental performance, discusses
problems with other officials and formulates
departmental policies;
provided by the private sector;

the selection of senior staff;

• authorises funding for policy implementation

5

• studies and acts upon any legislation that may
affect the local authority;

• represents the authority in its dealings with other
authorities and interest organisations;

6

• advises on the interpretation and implementation
of local government policy.

reports, budgets, forecasts or other information;

• plans and controls the allocation of resources and

2

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• negotiates and monitors contracted out services
TASKS

1

7

RELATED JOB TITLES
Chief executive (local government)
Town clerk

programmes and institutes reporting, auditing
and control systems.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

39

Major Group 1

1114 SENIOR OFFICIALS OF
SPECIAL INTEREST
ORGANISATIONS

1

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

2

Workers in this unit group ensure that legal, statutory
and other regulations concerning the running of trade
associations, employers associations, learned
societies, trade unions, charitable organisations and
similar bodies are observed and act as representatives
of the organisation concerned.

Entry is most common by election, internal
promotion or direct appointment and is usually based
on relevant experience although some employers
also require candidates to have academic
qualifications.

TASKS

3

• plans, organises, co-ordinates and directs the
resources of special interest organisations;

• formulates and directs the implementation of
organisation policy;

4

• represents union, association or organisation in
consultation or negotiation with government,
employers and other bodies;

• stimulates public interest by providing publicity,
giving lectures and interviews and organising
appeals for a variety of causes;

5

• directs or undertakes the preparation, publication
and dissemination of reports and other
information of interest to members and other
interested parties.

6

RELATED JOB TITLES

7

General Secretary (trade union)
Manager (charitable organisation)
National organiser (charitable organisation)
Ombudsman

8

9
40

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Job holders in this minor group plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate all activities and
resources involved with production, processing, maintenance and construction operations
in industry.

Major Group 1

MINOR GROUP 112
PRODUCTION MANAGERS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
1121 PRODUCTION, WORKS AND MAINTENANCE MANAGERS
1122 MANAGERS IN CONSTRUCTION
1123 MANAGERS IN MINING AND ENERGY

1121 PRODUCTION, WORKS AND
MAINTENANCE MANAGERS
Production, works and maintenance managers plan,
organise, direct and co-ordinate the activities and
resources necessary for production in manufacturing
industries and the maintenance of engineering items,
equipment and machinery.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no pre-set entry standards. Entry is
possible with either a degree or equivalent
qualification, relevant experience or without
academic qualifications. On-the-job training is
provided and professional qualifications are
available.

TASKS

• liaises with other managers to plan overall
production activity and daily manufacturing and
maintenance activity;

1

• establishes causes of breakdowns, arranges for
any necessary repairs, keeps records of faults and
checks completed maintenance work for
compliance with statutory regulations.

RELATED JOB TITLES

2

3

Engineering manager
Factory manager
Production manager
Service manager
Shift manager
Works manager

4

1122 MANAGERS IN
CONSTRUCTION

5

Managers in construction plan, organise, direct, coordinate the construction and maintenance of civil
and structural engineering works including houses,
flats, factories, roads and runways, bridges, tunnels
and railway works, harbour, dock and marine works
and water supply, drainage and sewage works.

6

• manages production to ensure that orders are
completed to an agreed date and conform to
customer and other requirements;

• monitors production and production costs and
undertakes or arranges for the preparation of
reports and records;

• arranges for regular inspections of plant,
machinery and equipment to detect wear or
deterioration;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

7

There are no pre-set entry standards. Entry is
possible with either a degree or equivalent
qualification, relevant experience or without
academic qualifications. On-the-job training is
provided and professional qualifications are
available.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

41

Major Group 1

TASKS

TASKS

• receives invitations to tender, arranges for

• co-ordinates the activities of mines, quarries,

estimates and liaises with client, architect and
engineers to prepare contract documents;

• plans site layout and access routes, advises on

drilling operations and offshore installations;

• determines staffing, material and other needs;

technical problems and staffing, oversees
implementation of site security and safety
procedures;

• co-ordinates and supervises coal-face production

• plans, directs and co-ordinates the construction

• ensures that all haulage, storage, purification and

and maintenance of civil and structural
engineering works, including demolition
contracts, open-cast mining works and pipeline
and piling contracts;

1

activities and ensures compliance with health and
safety regulations;
distribution work is performed efficiently and in
compliance with statutory and other regulations;

• arranges for the provision of gas, water and
electricity supplies.

• examines designs, drawings and specifications,
confirms programme of building work and lays
down building lines, levels, etc.;

2

• monitors and reports upon work in progress to
ensure that materials and construction methods
meet with specifications and statutory
requirements and that there are no deviations
from agreed plans.

3

RELATED JOB TITLES

4

5

6

7

8

Clerk of works
Construction manager
Contracts manager (building and contracting)
Site manager

1123 MANAGERS IN MINING AND
ENERGY
Managers in mining, energy and water supply plan,
organise, direct and co-ordinate the activities and
resources necessary for the extraction of minerals
and other natural deposits and the production, storage
and provision of gas, water and electricity supplies.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no pre-set entry standards. Entry is
possible with either GCSEs/S grades or A levels/H
grades, a BTEC/SQA award, a degree or equivalent
qualification and/or with relevant experience. Some
apprenticeships are available. Off- and on-the-job
training is provided and can lead to professional
qualifications.

9
42

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Operations manager (mining, water and energy)
Overman/woman
Quarry manager

Functional managers plan, organise and advise on specialist functions or fields of activity
in an organisation. They formulate and administer policies concerning the legal, financial,
marketing, sales, purchasing, work methods, public relations, personnel, information and
communication technology, and the research and development operations of an organisation.

Major Group 1

MINOR GROUP 113
FUNCTIONAL MANAGERS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
1131
1132
1133
1134
1135

FINANCIAL MANAGERS AND CHARTERED SECRETARIES
MARKETING AND SALES MANAGERS
PURCHASING MANAGERS
ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS MANAGERS
PERSONNEL, TRAINING AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
MANAGERS
1136 INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
MANAGERS
1137 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT MANAGERS

1131 FINANCIAL MANAGERS AND
CHARTERED SECRETARIES
Financial managers plan, organise, direct and coordinate financial information and advise on
company financial policy. Chartered secretaries
organise and direct the work associated with
meetings of directors and shareholders, act as
company representatives, control share registration
work in commercial enterprises, advise on company
law and ensure that all related regulations concerning
the running of a company are observed.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible with either GCSEs/S grades, A
levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award, a degree or
equivalent qualification. Professional qualifications
are available and are required for certain posts.

TASKS

1

2

3

collection and analysis of accounting, budgetary
and related information;

• liaises with other managers to determine
company financial policy and staffing levels
appropriate for accounting activities;

4

• advises on company law or practice and ensures
that company's articles and memorandum of
association are adhered to;

5

• maintains share registers in accordance with the
Companies Act and deals with all matters relating
to the sale, transfer and purchase of shares.

6
RELATED JOB TITLES
Company registrar
Company treasurer
Credit manager
Finance manager
Financial director
Merchant banker

7

• advises on financial matters, plans external and

8

internal audit programmes and arranges for the

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

43

Major Group 1

1132 MARKETING AND SALES
MANAGERS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Marketing and sales managers plan, organise, direct
and undertake market research and formulate and
implement an organisation's marketing and sales
policies.

Entry is most common with A levels/H grades, a
BTEC/SQA award, a degree or equivalent
qualification. Off- and on-the-job training is
provided and professional qualifications are
available.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1

2

Entrants to the professional qualifications of the
Chartered Institute of Marketing require GCSEs/S
grades, A levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award, an
Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, a degree or
equivalent qualification and/or relevant experience.
NVQs/SVQs in Sales Management are available at
Level 4.

TASKS

• assesses the type, quality, quantity and price of
items and dates when they must be available;

• decides on whether orders should be put out to
tender and evaluates suppliers' quotes;

• negotiates contract with supplier and draws up
contract documents;

• arranges for quality checks of incoming goods;
TASKS

• interviews suppliers' representatives and visits

3

• liaises with other managers/staff to determine the
• discusses employer's or client's requirements,
plans surveys and analyses customers' reactions
to product, packaging, price, etc.;

4

trade fairs.

range of goods or services to be sold;

• examines and analyses sales figures and prepares
proposals for marketing campaigns and
promotional activities;

RELATED JOB TITLES
Purchasing director
Purchasing manager
Supplies manager

• controls the recruitment and training of sales staff;

5

• produces reports and recommendations
concerning marketing and sales strategies.

RELATED JOB TITLES

6

7

Business development manager
Commercial manager
Export manager
Marketing manager
Product manager
Sales and marketing director
Sales manager

1133 PURCHASING MANAGERS

8

Purchasing managers (not retail) plan, organise,
direct and co-ordinate the purchasing policies and
activities of industrial, commercial and government.

9
44

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

1134 ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC
RELATIONS MANAGERS
Advertising and public relations managers plan,
organise, direct and co-ordinate the advertising,
public relations and public information activities of
an organisation.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no pre-set entry standards, although most
entrants possess A levels/H grades, a degree or
equivalent qualification. Entry is also possible with
professional qualifications and/or relevant
experience. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.
NVQs/SVQs in both Advertising and Public
Relations are available at Levels 3 and 4.

TASKS

• liaises with client to discuss product/service to

• determines staffing needs;

be marketed, defines target group and assesses
the suitability of various media;

• conceives advertising campaign to impart the

• prepares job descriptions, drafts advertisements
and interviews candidates;

desired product image in an effective and
economical way;

• monitors employee performance and discusses

• reviews and revises campaign in light of sales

• provides or arranges for provision of training

figures, surveys, etc.;

• stays abreast of changes in media, readership or
viewing figures and advertising rates;

• arranges conferences, exhibitions, seminars, etc.
to promote the image of a product, service or
organisation.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Advertising manager
Media director
Public relations manager
Publicity manager

Major Group 1

TASKS

career development needs with employees;
courses;

• undertakes industrial relations negotiations with
employees representatives or trade unions;

1

• develops and administers salary, health and safety
and promotion policies;

• examines and reports upon company and
departmental structures, chains of command,
information flows, etc. and evaluates efficiency
of existing operations;

2

• considers alternative work procedures to improve
productivity.

3

RELATED JOB TITLES

1135 PERSONNEL, TRAINING AND
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
MANAGERS
Job holders within this unit group plan, organise,
direct the personnel, training and industrial relations
policies of organisations, advise on resource
allocation and utilisation problems, measure the
effectiveness of an organisation's systems, methods
and procedures and advise on, plan and implement
procedures to improve utilisation of labour,
equipment and materials.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no pre-set entry standards, although entry
is most common with a degree or equivalent
qualification. Off- and on-the-job training is
provided and professional qualifications are
available. NVQs/SVQs in Personnel Support,
Personnel Management and Personnel Strategy are
available at Levels 3, 4 and 5 respectively. NVQs/
SVQs in Training and Development are available at
Levels 3 and 4.

Human resources manager
Industrial relations manager
Personnel manager
Training manager
Works study manager

4

5

1136 INFORMATION AND
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGY MANAGERS
Job holders in this unit group plan, organise, direct
and co-ordinate the work necessary to operate and
provide information communication technology
services, to maintain and develop associated network
facilities and to provide software and hardware
support.

6

7
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no pre-set entry requirements. Candidates
are recruited with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience. Off- and

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

45

Major Group 1

on-the-job training is provided. Modern
Apprenticeships, professional qualifications and
NVQs/SVQs at Levels 2, 3 and 4 are available.
TASKS

TASKS

• establishes product design and performance
objectives in consultation with other business
functions;

• liaises with production departments to investigate
• plans, organises and directs the information and
communication technology resources of an
organisation;

manufacturing problems and investigations;

• develops research methodology, implements and
reports upon research investigations undertaken;

• liaises with user group representatives to clarify

1

requirements and development needs;

• plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates

• implements feasibility studies to guide the

responsibilities of the research and development
team;

development and direction of Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) systems;

• monitors the standards of scientific and technical
research undertaken by research team.

• plans work schedules and assigns tasks to ICT

2

staff;

• advises on the uses and capabilities of ICT
services;

• co-ordinates the introduction of new ICT systems
or the modification of existing systems.

3

RELATED JOB TITLES

4

5

Computer manager
Computer operations manager
Data processing manager
IT manager
Systems manager
Telecom manager

1137 RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT MANAGERS

6

Managers in this unit group plan, organise, coordinate and direct resources to undertake the
systematic investigation necessary for the
development of new, or to enhance the performance
of existing products and services.

7

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8

Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent
qualification. Training is usually provided on-thejob, although support may be provided for
postgraduate study. Professional qualifications are
available.

9
46

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Director of research
Laboratory manager
Research manager

Quality and customer care managers plan, organise, co-ordinate and direct resources
necessary for measuring, monitoring and reporting upon the qualitative aspects of a product
or service, and for receiving and dealing with the responses, complaints and further needs
of customers.

Major Group 1

MINOR GROUP 114
QUALITY AND CUSTOMER CARE MANAGERS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
1141 QUALITY ASSURANCE MANAGERS
1142 CUSTOMER CARE MANAGERS

1141 QUALITY ASSURANCE
MANAGERS
Managers in this unit group plan, organise, coordinate and direct resources necessary for the
effective measuring, monitoring and reporting on the
qualitative aspects of a specified tangible (industrial
production) or non-tangible (service provision)
output.

1

• attends meetings with managers to discuss quality
related problems and possible methods for
quality improvement.

RELATED JOB TITLES

3

Quality assurance manager
Quality control manager
Quality manager

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no pre-set entry standards. Formal
academic requirements will vary between
occupations. Entry is possible with GCSEs/S grades,
A levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award, a degree or
equivalent qualification and/or with relevant
experience. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.
NVQs/SVQs that encompass quality assurance
elements are available up to Level 4.
TASKS

• develops and implements visual, physical,
functional or other appropriate measures and
tests of quality;

• analyses and report upon the results of quality
control tests to ensure that production remains
within specification;

• considers the impact of legislation upon
specification requirements;

• examines current operating procedures to
determine how quality may be improved;

2

4

1142 CUSTOMER CARE
MANAGERS
Workers in this unit group plan, organise, co-ordinate
and direct resources necessary for receiving and
dealing with the responses, complaints or further
requirements of purchasers and users of a product
or service.

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

There are no pre-set entry requirements. Candidates
are recruited with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience. Specialist
qualifications may be required for work within
certain sectors.

7

TASKS

• develop and implement policies and procedures
to deal effectively with customer requirements
and complaints;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

47

Major Group 1

• co-ordinates and controls the work of those
within customer services departments;

• discuss customer responses with other managers
with a view to improving the product or service
provided;

• plan, co-ordinate and direct the operations of help
and advisory services to provide support for
customers and users.

1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Customer relations manager
Customer service manager
Help desk manager

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
48

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this minor group organise, co-ordinate and direct the day-to-day running of
banks, building societies, post offices, insurance companies and other financial institutions.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

Major Group 1

MINOR GROUP 115
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION AND OFFICE MANAGERS

1151 FINANCIAL INSTITUTION MANAGERS
1152 OFFICE MANAGERS

1
1151 FINANCIAL INSTITUTION
MANAGERS

RELATED JOB TITLES

Job holders in this unit group plan, organise, direct
and co-ordinate the activities and resources of banks,
building societies, insurance companies and post
offices.

Bank manager
Branch manager (bank, building society)
Building society manager
Post Office manager
Sub-postmaster

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1152 OFFICE MANAGERS

Entry is possible with Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ
Level III, A levels/H grades, a degree or equivalent
qualification. Those with higher qualifications
obtain accelerated training. Internal promotion to
management is also possible. On-the-job training is
provided. Professional qualifications are available
and often mandatory.

TASKS

• plans, organises, directs and co-ordinates the
activities of financial institutions;

2

3

Workers in this unit group plan, organise, direct and
co-ordinate the activities and resources of offices
within commercial, public and other organisations.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry will usually require GCSEs/S grades but is
possible with other academic qualifications and/or
relevant experience. Professional qualifications are
available in some occupations.

• verifies that accounting, recording and
information storage and retrieval procedures are
adhered to;

• authorises loans and mortgages in accordance
with bank or building society policy;

• promotes financial services, establishes contact
with the local business community and
professional firms;

• preparing general reports and briefs on more
complex cases for senior management.

4

5

6

TASKS

• plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates
responsibilities;

• advises on the handling of all correspondence
and enquiries relating to accounts, sales,
statistical and vacancy records;

7

• ensures that procedures for considering, issuing,
amending and endorsing insurance policies are
adhered to;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

49

Major Group 1

• plans, organises, directs and co-ordinates the
activities and resources of other offices not
elsewhere classified including box offices, other
ticket offices and accommodation bureaux.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Accounts manager
Administration manager
Office manager

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
50

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Managers in distribution, storage and retailing plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate the
activities and resources necessary for the efficient and convenient transportation of
passengers or freight, the loading, unloading, storage and distribution of goods and materials,
and the sale of wholesale and retail goods to customers.

Major Group 1

MINOR GROUP 116
MANAGERS IN DISTRIBUTION, STORAGE AND RETAILING

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
1161 TRANSPORT AND DISTRIBUTION MANAGERS
1162 STORAGE AND WAREHOUSE MANAGERS
1163 RETAIL AND WHOLESALE MANAGERS

1161 TRANSPORT AND
DISTRIBUTION MANAGERS
Transport and distribution managers plan, organise,
direct and co-ordinate the activities and resources
necessary for the safe, efficient and economic
movement of passengers and freight by road, rail,
sea and air transport.

1

staffing and distribution expenditure to determine
future distribution policies;

2

• ensures that regulations regarding hours of work,
the licensing of crews and transport equipment,
the operational safety and efficiency of
equipment, the insurance of vehicles and other
statutory regulations are complied with;

3

• ensures that harbour channels and berths are
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Candidates are recruited with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or with relevant experience.
Entrants to management trainee schemes offered by
larger companies will require GCSEs/S grades, A
levels/H grades, a degree or other equivalent
qualifications. Off- and on-the-job training is
provided. Professional qualifications are available.
Legislation of the European Union requires all
transport managers to hold a Certificate of
Professional Competence (CPC).

TASKS

• plans the optimum utilisation of staff and
operating equipment, and co-ordinates
maintenance activities to ensure least possible
disruption to services;

• examines traffic reports, load patterns, traffic
receipts and other data and revises transport
services or freight rates accordingly;

• directs the movement, handling and storage of
freight in transit, and reviews space utilisation,

maintained and liaises with ship owners, crew,
customs officials, dock and harbour staff to
arrange entry, berthing and servicing of ships;

4

• supervises day-to-day activities in a railway
station;

• arranges for maintenance of airport runways and
buildings, liaises with fuel and catering crews to
ensure adequate supplies and resolves any
complaints and problems raised by airport users.

RELATED JOB TITLES

5

6

Harbour master
Station master
Traffic manager
Transport manager

7
1162 STORAGE AND WAREHOUSE
MANAGERS
Managers within this unit group plan, organise, direct
and co-ordinate the procedures and resources
necessary for the receipt, storage and warehousing
of goods and for the maintenance of stocks at an
optimal level.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

51

Major Group 1

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Academic qualifications may be required for some
posts and entry is also possible with relevant
experience. Training is usually provided on-the-job.
NVQs/SVQs in Distribution and Warehousing
Operations are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.

degree or equivalent qualification. Entry is also
possible through promotion after gaining sufficient
experience. NVQs/SVQs in Retail Operations are
available at Level 4.

TASKS

• provides information about merchandise to staff
and customers;
TASKS

1

• liaises with production, maintenance, sales and
other departments to determine the materials and
other items required for current and future
production schedules and sales commitments;

• reviews, develops and implements stock control,
handling and distribution policies to maximise
use of space, money, labour and other resources;

2

• advises purchasing department on type, quality
and quantity of goods required and dates by
which they must be available;

3

• prepares reports on expenditure and advises on
materials and parts standardisation, future stores
and stock control policies;

• decides on storage conditions for particular
items, allocates warehouse space and arranges
for regular stock inspections to detect
deterioration or damage.

4

RELATED JOB TITLES

5

6

7

Parts manager
Stock control manager
Stores manager
Warehouse manager

1163 RETAIL AND WHOLESALE
MANAGERS
Retail and wholesale managers plan, organise, direct
and co-ordinate the operations of retail and wholesale
establishments.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8

Entry requirements vary from company to company.
Entrants may possess GCSEs/S grades, A levels/H
grades, GNVQs/GSVQs, a BTEC/SQA award, a

9
52

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

• ensures that adequate reserves of merchandise
are held and that stock keeping is carried out
efficiently;

• maintains financial and other records and
controls security arrangements for the premises;

• authorises payment for supplies received and
decides on vending price and credit terms;

• examines quality of merchandise and ensures that
effective use is made of advertising and display
facilities.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Baker's manager
Garden centre manager
Retail manager
Shop manager (retail trade)
Showroom manager
Wholesale manager

Protective service officers manage the operations of police stations, fire stations and prisons,
supervise customs, excise and immigration staff and assist with inspections of goods and
persons entering or leaving the country and serve as commissioned officers in Her Majesty's
armed forces and in foreign and Commonwealth armed forces.

Major Group 1

MINOR GROUP 117
PROTECTIVE SERVICE OFFICERS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
1171 OFFICERS IN ARMED FORCES
1172 POLICE OFFICERS (INSPECTORS AND ABOVE)
1173 SENIOR OFFICERS IN FIRE, AMBULANCE, PRISON AND
RELATED SERVICES
1174 SECURITY MANAGERS

1171 OFFICERS IN ARMED
FORCES
Workers in this unit group serve as commissioned
officers in Her Majesty's armed forces, foreign
and Commonwealth armed forces; plan, direct,
organise and administer military operations and
perform duties for which there is no civilian
equivalent.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry to the UK armed forces is possible with
GCSEs/S grades, A levels/H grades or with higher
academic qualifications or by promotion from NCO
or other rank. Each arm of the forces has different
age restrictions. Candidates must pass a medical
examination and interview.

TASKS

• advises and provides information on military

1

2

authorities as requested or when faced with civil
disorder, natural disaster or other emergency;

• monitors record keeping systems and prepares
reports and expenditure estimates.

RELATED JOB TITLES

4

Captain
Commissioned officer
Flight-Lieutenant
Lieutenant
Lieutenant-Commander
Major
Squadron Leader

5

1172 POLICE OFFICERS
(INSPECTORS AND ABOVE)

6

Police officers plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate
the resources and activities of a specific geographical
or functional area of generalised or specialised police
work.

aspects of defence policy;

• plans, directs and co-ordinates training and
military manoeuvres;

• supervises the operation of military units and
monitors the activities of junior officers, NCOs
and other ranks;

• plans, directs and administers aid to civilian

3

7
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is only possible by internal promotion from
sergeant. Degree or equivalent qualification holders
may obtain accelerated promotion. All police forces
have age restrictions and medical requirements.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

53

Major Group 1

TASKS

• liaises with senior officers to determine staff,
financial and other short and long term needs;

• plans, directs and co-ordinates general policing
for an area or functional unit;

• directs and monitors the work of subordinate
officers;

• establishes contacts and sources of information
concerning crimes planned or committed;

1

Entry to the prison service is also subject to age and
height restrictions. Entry to senior positions within
the ambulance service is largely by internal
promotion from supervisory roles.

• directs and co-ordinates the operation of record
keeping systems and the preparation of reports.

TASKS

• liaises with senior officials and/or government
departments to determine staffing, financial and
other short and long term needs;

• prepares reports for insurance companies, the
Home Office, Scottish Home and Health
Department, and other bodies as necessary;

• advises on the recruitment, training and
RELATED JOB TITLES

2

3

Assistant chief constable
Chief constable
Chief inspector (police service)
Chief superintendent (police service)
Deputy chief constable

1173 SENIOR OFFICERS IN FIRE,
AMBULANCE, PRISON AND
RELATED SERVICES

4

5

6

7

8

Fire officers plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate
the activities and resources of a specific physical or
functional area of a statutory or private fire brigade
and the resources necessary for the protection of
property at fires within a salvage corps area.
Ambulance officers plan, organise, direct and coordinate the resources necessary for the provision
of ambulance services. Prison officers (principal
officer and above) plan, organise, direct, and coordinate the activities and resources necessary for
the running of a prison, remand or detention centre.
Customs officers plan and direct the work of
customs, excise and immigration staff in the
monitoring and inspection of goods and persons
crossing national borders.

monitoring of staff;

• fire officers plan, direct and co-ordinate an
operational plan for one or more fire stations,
attend fires and other emergencies to minimise
danger to property and people, arrange for the
salvaging of goods, immediate temporary repairs
and security measures for fire damaged premises
as necessary;

• ambulance officers plan, organise, direct and coordinate the activities of ambulance personnel
and control room assistants, for the provision of
ambulance services for emergency and nonemergency cases;

• prison offices interview prisoner on arrival and
discharge/departure, receive reports on
disciplinary problems and decide on appropriate
action and make periodic checks on internal and
external security;

• customs, excise and immigration officers advise
on the interpretation of regulations concerning
taxes, duties and immigration requirements and
enforce these regulations through monitoring of
premises, examining goods entering the country
to ensure correct duty is paid and establishing
that passengers have the necessary authorisation
for crossing national borders.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

RELATED JOB TITLES

The position of fire officer is achieved by internal
promotion from Fireman, Leading fireman or Subofficer. Entry to senior positions within the prison
service and customs and excise are either by internal
promotion or by open competition. Candidates
typically possess a degree or equivalent qualification.

Chief immigration officer
Chief preventive officer
Fire officer
Governor (prison service)
Principal officer (prison service)
Station officer (ambulance service)

9
54

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Major Group 1

1174 SECURITY MANAGERS
Managers in this unit group plan, organise, direct
and co-ordinate the resources and activities necessary
for the provision of private detective services and
security measures for individuals, establishments,
organisations or for broader geographical areas.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Appointment may occur through promotion from
supervisory security posts.
Professional
qualifications are available and may be required by
some employers. Off- and on-the-job training is
provided. NVQs/SVQs at Levels 2 and 3 are
available.

1

2

TASKS

• plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates

3

responsibilities of detective and security staff;

• analyses current security requirements, advises
clients, and develops and implements appropriate
security measures;

4

• oversees the security clearance of new members
of an organisation;

• arranges for the monitoring, reporting and
reviewing of present procedures with a view to
improving the efficacy of security arrangements;

5

• ensures that the activities of detective and
security staff comply with legal requirements and
liaises with civil law enforcement authorities
where necessary.

6

RELATED JOB TITLES
Operations manager (security services)
Owner (detective agency)
Owner (security services)
Security manager

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

55

Major Group 1

MINOR GROUP 118
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES MANAGERS
Managers in health and social services plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate the activities
and resources necessary for the efficient provision of primary and secondary health care
services, social care establishments and other welfare services.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
1181
1182
1183
1184
1185

1

HOSPITAL AND HEALTH SERVICE MANAGERS
PHARMACY MANAGERS
HEALTHCARE PRACTICE MANAGERS
SOCIAL SERVICES MANAGERS
RESIDENTIAL AND DAY CARE MANAGERS

2
1181 HOSPITAL AND HEALTH
SERVICE MANAGERS

3

Managers in this unit group plan, organise, direct
and co-ordinate the resources and activities of health
care providers and purchasers at both district and
unit level.

4

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

RELATED JOB TITLES
Clinical manager
Health service manager
Manager (hospital service)

1182 PHARMACY MANAGERS

5

6

Entrants require a degree or equivalent qualification,
a professional qualification and/or relevant
experience. Off- and on-the-job training is provided
through management training schemes. The nature
of schemes vary between regions and occupational
areas.

TASKS

• the day-to-day management of a service or unit;

Pharmacy managers plan, organise, co-ordinate and
direct the resources and activities of retail, hospital
and industrial pharmacies.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Pharmacists require an accredited university degree
in pharmacy. Pharmacists working in hospital or
industrial posts usually possess a postgraduate
qualification. Professional qualifications are
available and mandatory for pharmacists working
in retail and hospital posts.

• liaises with health care professionals to determine
short and long term needs and how to meet these
objectives within budgetary constraints;

7

• negotiates contracts with providers and
purchasers of health care services;

TASKS

• prepare and dispense medicines to hospital
patients and on prescription to the general public;

• monitor and report upon the effectiveness of

• advise customers on how to use prescribed

services with a view to improving the efficiency
of health care provision.

medicines and provide information on the sale
of over the counter medicines;

8

9
56

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

maintaining prescription files and recording the
issue of narcotics, poisons and other habit
forming drugs;

• liaises with other health care professionals with
regards to the supply and form of appropriate
medications;

• research, develop, test and manufacture new

1184 SOCIAL SERVICES
MANAGERS
Job holders in this unit group plan, organise, direct
and co-ordinate the resources necessary to protect
the welfare of certain groups within local authorities
including children and young people, families under
stress, people with disabilities, elderly people and
people who are mentally or physically ill.

Major Group 1

• responsible for stock control, ordering, labelling,

pharmaceutical products.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Pharmacist's manager
Shop manager (retail trade, pharmacists)

1183 HEALTHCARE PRACTICE
MANAGERS
Job holders in this unit group plan, organise, direct
and co-ordinate the work and resources of medical,
dental and other forms of health care practice.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1

Entry is usually through internal promotion for those
with the appropriate professional qualifications and
relevant experience. Post-qualifying professional
qualifications are available.

2

TASKS

• responsibility for meeting the statutory
requirements of local authority social services
departments;

3

• determines staffing, financial, material and other
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no pre-set entry requirements. Candidates
are recruited with a variety of academic
qualifications or with relevant experience.
Professional qualifications are available and are
required for certain posts.

short and long term needs;

• plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates
responsibilities of social services staff;

• monitors and evaluates departmental
performance with a view to improving social
service provision;

• studies and advises upon changes in legislation
that will impact upon social service provision;

TASKS

• plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates

5

• liaises with representatives of other relevant
agencies.

responsibilities of practice staff;

• negotiates contracts for services with other

4

6

RELATED JOB TITLES

health care providers and purchasers;

• maintains patient files on medical history,
consultations made and treatment undertaken
and/or drugs prescribed;

• responsible for budgeting, pricing and accounting

Social services manager
Team manager (social services)

7

1185 RESIDENTIAL AND DAY
CARE MANAGERS

activities within the practice.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Medical practice manager (health services)

Managers in this group plan, organise, direct and
co-ordinate the resources necessary in the provision
and running of residential and day care
establishments for persons who require specialised
care and/or supervision.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

57

Major Group 1

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no pre-set entry standards. Entry is based
largely upon experience. Off- and on-the-job training
is provided. NVQs/SVQs in Care and Community
Work are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.

TASKS

• determines staffing, financial, material and other
short and long term requirements;

1

• plans work schedules, assigns tasks and delegates
responsibilities of staff;

• arranges for payment of bills, keeps accounts and
adheres to health, safety and other statutory
requirements;

2

• maintains contact between residents and the local
community and/or family and friends;

3

• ensures that residents have access to health and
social care services as required;

• creates a friendly secure atmosphere to gain the
trust and confidence of those in the home or under
supervision;

4

5

• ensures that the physical comfort and all material
needs of residents are provided and attempts to
resolve problems that may arise.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Care manager
Manager (nursing home)
Owner (retirement home)
Residential manager

6

7

8

9
58

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Job holders in this sub-major group manage agricultural, forestry, fishing and environmental
operations; co-ordinate and direct the activities of restaurants, hotels, entertainment
establishments, sports and leisure facilities, travel and property agencies, independent shops,
garages, hairdressers and other services.

Major Group 1

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 12
MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN AGRICULTURE
AND SERVICES

MINOR GROUP 121
MANAGERS IN FARMING, HORTICULTURE,
FORESTRY AND FISHING

1

Workers in this minor group plan, organise, direct, and control the activities and resources
of agricultural, forestry, fishing and similar establishments and are responsible for the
protection and management of the natural environment.

2

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
1211 FARM MANAGERS
1212 NATURAL ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION MANAGERS
1219 MANAGERS IN ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, FORESTRY AND FISHING
NEC

1211 FARM MANAGERS
Managers in this unit group plan, organise and coordinate the activities and resources of farming
establishments cultivating arable crops, fruits, trees
and shrubs and/or raising cattle, sheep, pigs and
poultry.

3

4

TASKS

• determines financial, staffing and other short and
long term needs;

5

• produces and maintains records of production,
finance and breeding;

• decides or advises on the types of crops to be
grown or livestock raised;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• plans intensity and sequence of farm operations

Most farm and horticultural managers have a
vocational agricultural qualification. These range
from BTEC/SQA awards to postgraduate
qualifications in farm business organisation and
management. Candidates must normally have had
practical agricultural experience before starting a
course. NVQs/SVQs in Agriculture are available at
Level 4.

• markets and arranges for the sale of crops,

6

and orders seed, fertiliser, farming equipment and
other supplies;
livestock and other farm produce.

7

RELATED JOB TITLES
Farm manager
Manager (agriculture)
Manager (horticulture)

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

59

Major Group 1

1

2

1212 NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
AND CONSERVATION
MANAGERS
Workers in this unit group plan, co-ordinate, direct
and organise the resources and activities necessary
for the protection, maintenance and management of
the general environment or of specific areas
designated to be of special status.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess a BTEC/SQA award, a
degree or equivalent qualification. Extensive preentry experience is essential. Professional
qualifications, higher degrees and postgraduate
diplomas are available and may be required for
certain posts.

and fishing not elsewhere classified in MINOR
GROUP 121: Managers in Farming, Horticulture,
Forestry and Fishing.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry requirements range from no qualifications to
degree level or equivalent awards depending on the
occupation. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.
Professional qualifications and NVQs/SVQs are
available in some areas.

TASKS

• determines staffing, financial and other long and
short term needs and keeps records on finance,
production and breeding;

• decides, or advises on, type of animal to be bred
TASKS

3

and/or trained and selects, buys and trains
animals accordingly;

• responsible for managing and protecting the

• plans and directs the establishment of forest

environment in areas designated to be of special
interest;

nurseries, assumes responsibility for a particular
area of forest/woodland and regularly inspects
forest work;

• represents the interests of the environment in
reconciling conflicts between the interests of
business, the general public and the local
community;

• selects suitable breeding grounds for shellfish,

• co-ordinates the provision of information and

requirements, cultivation problems and
gardening and grounds keeping;

4

provides controlled and safe access to the
countryside for members of the public;

5

• ensures that any development within protected
areas is undertaken in accordance with planning
and other statutory requirements.

sea and freshwater fish and purchases stock;

• advises farmers and horticulturists on cropping

• organises, co-ordinates and directs farming,
fishing and forestry activities not elsewhere
classified, including tree felling, agricultural
contracting and offshore fishing.

6

RELATED JOB TITLES

RELATED JOB TITLES

7

Conservation manager
Countryside manager
Environmental manager
National park manager

Cattery owner
Fish farm manager
Kennels owner
Nursery manager (horticulture)
Racehorse trainer

8

1219 MANAGERS IN ANIMAL
HUSBANDRY, FORESTRY AND
FISHING NEC
Managers in this unit group perform a variety of
managerial tasks in farming, horticulture, forestry

9
60

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this minor group plan, organise, direct and co-ordinate (usually with the help of
other managers) the activities and resources of hotels, public houses and similar
establishments, restaurants, recreation and entertainment establishments, leisure and sports
facilities and travel agencies.

Major Group 1

MINOR GROUP 122
MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN HOSPITALITY
AND LEISURE SERVICES

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
1221
1222
1223
1224
1225
1226

1

HOTEL AND ACCOMMODATION MANAGERS
CONFERENCE AND EXHIBITION MANAGERS
RESTAURANT AND CATERING MANAGERS
PUBLICANS AND MANAGERS OF LICENSED PREMISES
LEISURE AND SPORTS MANAGERS
TRAVEL AGENCY MANAGERS

1221 HOTEL AND
ACCOMMODATION
MANAGERS
Job holders in this unit group plan, organise, direct
and co-ordinate the activities and resources of hotels,
hostels, lodging homes, holiday camps, holiday flats
and chalets and organise the domestic, catering, and
entertainment facilities on passenger ships.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience. Larger
hotel chains offer managerial trainee schemes.
Candidates for these usually require a BTEC/SQA
award, a degree or equivalent qualification, or a
professional qualification. Off- and on-the-job
training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in Accommodation
Management are available at Level 4.

TASKS

• analyses demand and decides on type, standard
and cost of services to be offered;

2

• approves and arranges shipboard entertainment
and shore trips and liaises with ship's agent to
ensure that ship is adequately provisioned;

• arranges for payment of bills, keeps accounts and
adheres to licensing and other statutory
regulations.

4

RELATED JOB TITLES
Caravan park owner
Guest house proprietor
Hotel manager
Hotelier

5

6

1222 CONFERENCE AND
EXHIBITION MANAGERS
Conference and exhibition managers plan, organise,
co-ordinate and direct the resources necessary for
the staging of conferences, exhibitions and other
similar events.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

7

8

• ensures physical comfort of residents or
passengers and makes special arrangements for
children, the elderly and the infirm if required;

3

Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience. Larger

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

61

Major Group 1

conference and exhibition management companies
may offer training schemes. Candidates for these
typically require a BTEC/SQA award, a degree or
an equivalent qualification. Off- and on-the-job
training is provided.

TASKS

• discusses conference and exhibition
requirements with clients;

1

• plans and arranges food preparation in
collaboration with other staff and organises the
provision of waiting or counter staff;
accounted for to prevent wastage and loss and to
keep within budget limit.

ordinates the activities of designers, crafts persons,
technical staff, caterers and other events staff;

• ensures that Health and Safety and other statutory
regulations are met.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Canteen manager
Catering manager
Fish and chip shopkeeper
Restaurant manager
Restaurateur

RELATED JOB TITLES
Conference manager
Exhibition manager

1223 RESTAURANT AND
CATERING MANAGERS
Restaurant and catering managers plan, direct and
co-ordinate the catering services of restaurants,
hotels and other organisations.

5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

7

waiting service are as required and that kitchen
and dining areas are kept clean in compliance
with statutory requirements;

• checks that supplies are properly used and

2

6

• verifies that quality of food, beverages and

creative inputs, and presents proposals to clients;

• plans work schedules, assigns tasks, and co-

4

and arranges for preparation of accounts;

• develops proposals encompassing technical and
• allocates exhibition space to exhibitors;

3

• purchases or directs the purchasing of supplies

Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience. Larger
restaurants and catering chains offer managerial
trainee schemes. Candidates for these usually require
a BTEC/SQA award, a degree or equivalent
qualification, or a professional qualification. Offand on-the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in
Restaurant Management are available at Level 4.

1224 PUBLICANS AND MANAGERS
OF LICENSED PREMISES
Publicans and managers of licensed premises
organise, direct and co-ordinate the activities and
resources of non-residential and residential public
houses and the bar and catering facilities at nonresidential clubs.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No formal academic qualifications are required.
Relevant experience is advantageous and candidates
must be over 18 years of age. Larger chains offer
accelerated promotion for holders of degrees or
equivalent qualifications. Off- and on-the-job
training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in On-Licensed
Premises Management are available at Level 4.

TASKS
TASKS

• plans catering services and directs junior staff;

8

• decides on range and quality of meals and
beverages to be provided or discusses customer's
requirements for special occasions;

9
62

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

• maintains financial records for the establishment;
• arranges purchase of alcoholic and other
beverages, bar snacks, cigarettes and other items
and ensures that stocks are stored in proper
conditions;

Major Group 1

• supervises bar, kitchen and cleaning staff and, if

RELATED JOB TITLES

necessary, assists with the serving of drinks;

• observes licensing laws and other statutory
regulations and regulates behaviour of customers
as necessary.
RELATED JOB TITLES
Club steward
Licensee
Public house manager
Publican

1225 LEISURE AND SPORTS
MANAGERS
Leisure and sports managers organise, direct and coordinate the activities and resources required for the
provision of sporting, artistic, theatrical and other
recreational and amenity services.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Both graduate and non-graduate entry is possible.
Employers are however increasingly seeking
applicants with BTEC/SQA awards, degrees or
equivalent qualifications. Off- and on-the-job training
is provided. NVQs/SVQs in Sports and Recreation
Management are available at Level 4. Professional
qualifications may also be required for some posts.

Leisure centre manager
Manager (snooker, billiards hall)
Riding school owner
Sports centre manager

1226 TRAVEL AGENCY
MANAGERS
Travel agency managers plan, organise, direct and
co-ordinate the resources and activities of travel
agencies and booking offices.

1

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades but is
possible with other academic qualifications and/or
relevant experience. Off- and on-the-job training is
available. NVQs/SVQs in Travel Services are
available at Level 4.

2

3
TASKS

• plans work schedules and assigns tasks and
responsibilities;

• co-ordinates the activities of clerical, secretarial

4

and other staff;

• discusses client's requirements and advises on
road, rail, air and sea travel and accommodation;

TASKS

• makes and confirms travel and accommodation

• recruits, supervises and trains box office staff,

bookings, arranges group holidays, tours and
individual itineraries;

cashiers, gardeners, coaches, groundsmen/women;

• advises on currency and passport/visa regulations

• ensures that facilities are kept clean and in good

and any necessary health precautions needed.

5

6

condition;

• keeps abreast of new trends and developments
in the creative arts and arranges exhibitions,
theatrical productions, bands, orchestras, etc.;

RELATED JOB TITLES
Manager (travel agents)
Travel manager

7

• advises on the facilities available and promotes
publicity in relation to shows, games, races, new
theme parks, etc.;

• checks and keeps custody of all cash receipts and

8

makes regular stock checks.

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

63

Major Group 1

MINOR GROUP 123
MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN OTHER SERVICE
INDUSTRIES
Workers in this minor group plan, co-ordinate and direct the activities and resources of
property services, garages, hairdressers and other personal services, small shops, waste
and recycling facilities, and other services not elsewhere classified in SUB-MAJOR GROUP
12: Managers and Proprietors in Agriculture and Services.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

1

1231 PROPERTY, HOUSING AND LAND MANAGERS
1232 GARAGE MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS
1233 HAIRDRESSING AND BEAUTY SALON MANAGERS AND
PROPRIETORS
1234 SHOPKEEPERS AND WHOLESALE/RETAIL DEALERS
1235 RECYCLING AND REFUSE DISPOSAL MANAGERS
1239 MANAGERS AND PROPRIETORS IN OTHER SERVICES NEC

2

3
1231 PROPERTY, HOUSING AND
LAND MANAGERS

4

Workers within this unit group manage shopping
centres, residential areas and private estates, and
arrange for the sale, purchase, rental and leasing of
property on behalf of clients and employers.

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

There are no formal academic requirements,
although entrants usually possess a BTEC/SQA
award, a degree or equivalent qualification. Many
employers expect the attainment of membership to
a professional body.
TASKS

7

• discusses client's requirements and may advise
client on the purchase of property and land for
investment and other purposes;

• conducts or arranges for structural surveys of

8

properties and undertakes any necessary
valuations of property or agricultural land;

• negotiates land or property purchases and sales
or leases and tenancy agreements and arranges

9
64

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

legal formalities with solicitors, building
societies and other parties;

• maintains or arranges for the maintenance of
estate accounts and records;

• acts as arbiter in disputes between landlord and
tenant and ensures that both fulfil their legal
obligations;

• examines and assesses housing applications,
advises on rent levels, investigates complaints,
maintains estate's amenities and liaises with
tenants' association and social workers to resolve
any family problems.
RELATED JOB TITLES
Housing manager
Property manager
Shopping centre manager

1232 GARAGE MANAGERS AND
PROPRIETORS
Garage managers and proprietors plan, organise,
direct and co-ordinate the day-to-day running of
garages and specialist vehicle maintenance and
repair establishments.

TASKS

• determines staffing, financial, material and other
There are no pre-set entry requirements, although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades or
Intermediate GNVQs/GSVQs Level II. Off- and onthe-job training is provided.

TASKS

• ensures that necessary spare parts, materials and
equipment are available or obtainable at short
notice;

• arranges for maintenance staff to perform
necessary maintenance and repair work on
vehicles or motorcycles;

• checks completed work for compliance with

short and long term needs;

• controls the allocation, training and remuneration
of hairdressing, beauty treatment and health club
staff;

Major Group 1

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• provides clients with information and resolves
any complaints or problems;

• undertakes and/or directs hair treatments, beauty

1

therapy or health and fitness activities;

• checks and maintains any health and fitness
equipment, and ensures that all safety
requirements are met;

• prepares estimates, financial statements and other
reports.

2

safety and other statutory regulations;

• maintains records of repair work to detect

RELATED JOB TITLES

recurrent faults;

• provides information about garage merchandise
for staff and customers.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Body shop manager (vehicle trades)
Garage manager
Garage owner
Service manager (garage)

3

Hairdresser's manager
Manager (hairdressing)
Owner (beauty salon)

1234 SHOPKEEPERS AND
WHOLESALE/RETAIL
DEALERS

4

Workers in this unit group co-ordinate, direct and
undertake the activities in the running of small
independent retail and wholesale establishments.

1233 HAIRDRESSING AND BEAUTY
SALON MANAGERS AND
PROPRIETORS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Workers in this unit group plan, organise, direct and
co-ordinate the activities and resources of
hairdressing salons, health clubs, beauty treatment
and similar establishments.

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
There are a variety of NVQs/SVQs relevant to the
activities of specialist retail establishments. NVQs/
SVQs in Retail Operations are available at Levels
2, 3 and 4.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TASKS

No formal qualifications are required for entry.
Candidates usually possess a BTEC/SQA award, an
NVQ/SVQ in Hairdressing at Level 3 and/or relevant
experience.

5

6

7
• provides information about merchandise to staff
and customers;

• ensures that adequate reserves of merchandise

8

are held and orders new stock as required;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

65

Major Group 1

• maintains financial and other shop records and

• studies legislation and liaises with waste

controls security arrangements for the premises;

enforcement regulation staff to ensure the
compliance with legislation regarding waste
disposal and recycling;

• authorises payment for supplies received and
decides on vending price and credit terms;

• examines quality of merchandise and ensures that
effective use is made of advertising and display
facilities.

• co-ordinates the resources and activities relating
to the procurement, collection, storage,
processing and sale of scrap metal.

RELATED JOB TITLES
RELATED JOB TITLES

1

General store keeper
Newsagent
Off-licensee
Owner (butchers)

2
1235 RECYCLING AND REFUSE
DISPOSAL MANAGERS

3

4

5

Recycling and refuse disposal managers plan,
organise, direct and co-ordinate the operations and
development of waste disposal and recycling
facilities within private waste management firms or
public authorities.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience.
Professional qualifications are available from the
Institute of Waste Management. Professional
qualifications may be mandatory in some operational
management posts.

General dealer
Manager (refuse disposal)
Recycling manager
Scrap metal merchant

1239 MANAGERS AND
PROPRIETORS IN OTHER
SERVICES NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
managerial tasks in other service industries not
elsewhere classified in MINOR GROUP 123:
Managers and Proprietors in Other Service Industries.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry requirements vary from company to company.
Some companies do not require candidates to have
academic qualifications but others require a degree
or equivalent qualification. Off- and on-the-job
training is provided.

TASKS

6

TASKS

• delegates tasks to staff and co-ordinates the

7

• determines staffing, financial, material and other
short and long term requirements;

maintenance and optimum utilisation of waste
disposal and recycling equipment to provide an
efficient service;

• ensures that adequate reserves of merchandise

• monitors levels of waste disposal and recycling,

• authorises payment for supplies received and

compiles statistics and produces reports;

are held and that stock keeping is carried out
efficiently;

decides on vending price and credit terms;

• liaises with members of the local community to

• examines quality of merchandise and ensures that

educate and promote the concept of recycling
and appropriate waste management;

effective use is made of advertising and display
facilities.

8

9
66

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Major Group 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Betting shop manager
Citizens Advice Bureau manager
Crematorium manager
Domestic services manager
Hire shop manager
Library Manager
Plant hire manager
Production manager (broadcasting)
Publisher's manager
Video shop owner

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

67

This major group covers occupations whose main tasks require a high level of knowledge
and experience in the natural sciences, engineering, life sciences, social sciences, humanities
and related fields. The main tasks consist of the practical application of an extensive body
of theoretical knowledge, increasing the stock of knowledge by means of research and
communicating such knowledge by teaching methods and other means.
Most occupations in this major group will require a degree or equivalent qualification,
with some occupations requiring postgraduate qualifications and/or a formal period of
experience-related training.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:

Major Group 2

MAJOR GROUP 2
PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATIONS

1

2

21 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROFESSIONALS
211
212
213

SCIENCE PROFESSIONALS
ENGINEERING PROFESSIONALS
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
PROFESSIONALS

3

22 HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
221

4

HEALTH PROFESSIONALS

23 TEACHING AND RESEARCH PROFESSIONALS
231
232

5

TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
RESEARCH PROFESSIONALS

24 BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE PROFESSIONALS
241
242
243
244
245

6

LEGAL PROFESSIONALS
BUSINESS AND STATISTICAL PROFESSIONALS
ARCHITECTS, TOWN PLANNERS, SURVEYORS
PUBLIC SERVICE PROFESSIONALS
LIBRARIANS AND RELATED PROFESSIONALS

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

69

Major Group 2

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 21
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROFESSIONALS
Science and technology professionals undertake research and consultancy activities within
the physical sciences; technically supervise the development, installation and maintenance
of mechanical, chemical, structural and electrical systems; advise upon and direct the
technical aspects of production programmes; and provide consultancy and development
services in the provision and utilisation of information technology.

MINOR GROUP 211
SCIENCE PROFESSIONALS

1

2

Science professionals are involved in planning, directing and undertaking research and
development, providing, technical, advisory and consultancy services in the fields of
chemistry, biological sciences, physics, geology and meteorology.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
2111 CHEMISTS
2112 BIOLOGICAL SCIENTISTS AND BIOCHEMISTS
2113 PHYSICISTS, GEOLOGISTS AND METEOROLOGISTS

3

4

5

2111 CHEMISTS
Chemists analyse and research physical aspects of
chemical structure and change within substances and
develop chemical techniques used in the manufacture
or modification of natural substances and processed
products.

composition, energy and chemical changes in
natural substances and processed materials;

• analyses results and experimental data;
• tests techniques and processes for reliability
under a variety of conditions;

• develops procedures for quality control of
manufactured products.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

7

Entrants usually possess a degree. Entry may also
be possible with an appropriate BTEC/SQA award,
an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, or other
academic qualifications. Further specialist training
is provided on the job. Some employers may expect
entrants to gain professional qualifications.

TASKS

8

• develops experimental procedures, instruments

RELATED JOB TITLES
Analytical chemist
Chemist
Development chemist
Industrial chemist
Physical chemist
Research chemist

2112 BIOLOGICAL SCIENTISTS
AND BIOCHEMISTS

and recording and testing systems;

• conducts experiments to identify chemical

9
70

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Biological scientists and biochemists examine and
investigate the morphology, structure, chemistry and

2113 PHYSICISTS, GEOLOGISTS
AND METEOROLOGISTS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Physicists, geologists and meteorologists study
relationships between matter, energy and other
physical phenomena, the nature, composition and
structure of the Earth and other planetary bodies and
forecast weather conditions and electrical, magnetic,
seismic and thermal activity.

Entrants usually possess a degree. Entry may also
be possible with an appropriate BTEC/SQA award,
an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, or other
academic qualifications. Further specialist training
is provided on the job. Some employers may expect
entrants to gain professional qualifications.

TASKS

• studies the physical and chemical form, structure,
composition and function of organs and tissues;

Major Group 2

physical characteristics of living organisms,
including their inter-relationships, environments and
diseases.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1

Entrants usually possess a degree, although entry
may also be possible with an appropriate BTEC/SQA
award. Further specialist training is provided on the
job. Higher degrees and professional qualifications
are available.

2

• identifies and studies the chemical substances,
including microbial infections, involved in
physiological processes and the progress of
disease;

• performs blood tests to study physiological and
pathological characteristics within blood cells;

• researches the effects of internal and external
environmental factors on the life processes and
other functions of living organisms;

• observes the structure of communities of
organisms in the laboratory and in their natural
environment;

• advises farmers, medical staff and others, on the
nature of field crops, livestock and produce and
on the treatment and prevention of disease;

• monitors the distribution, presence and behaviour
of plants, animals and aquatic life, and performs
other scientific tasks related to conservation not
performed by workers in UNIT GROUP 3551:
Conservation and Environmental Protection
Officers.

TASKS

• conducts experiments and tests and uses
mathematical models and theories to investigate
the structure and properties of matter,
transformations and propagations of energy, the
behaviour of macro-molecules and living cells
and their interaction with various forms of
energy;

4

• uses surveys, seismology and other methods to
determine the earth's mantle, crust, rock structure
and type, and to analyse and predict the
occurrence of seismological activity;

5

• observes, records and collates data on
atmospheric conditions from weather stations,
satellites, and observation vessels to plot and
forecast weather conditions;

• applies mathematical models and techniques to

6

assist in the solution of scientific problems in
industry and commerce and seeks out new
applications of mathematical analysis.

7

RELATED JOB TITLES
Biochemist
Biologist
Botanist
Medical laboratory scientific officer
Microbiologist
Pathologist
Zoologist

3

RELATED JOB TITLES
Geologist
Geophysicist
Mathematician
Meteorologist
Physicist
Seismologist

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

71

Major Group 2

MINOR GROUP 212
ENGINEERING PROFESSIONALS
Engineering professionals plan, organise and technically supervise the construction, testing,
installation and maintenance of mechanical, structural, chemical, electrical and electronic
systems and equipment, advise and direct technical aspects of production programmes,
and plan production schedules and work procedures to ensure efficiency and quality.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
2121
2122
2123
2124
2125
2126
2127
2128
2129

1

2

3

CIVIL ENGINEERS
MECHANICAL ENGINEERS
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS
ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS
CHEMICAL ENGINEERS
DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERS
PRODUCTION AND PROCESS ENGINEERS
PLANNING AND QUALITY CONTROL ENGINEERS
ENGINEERING PROFESSIONALS NEC

2121 CIVIL ENGINEERS

4

Civil engineers undertake research and design, direct
construction and manage the operation and
maintenance of civil and mining engineering structures.

• determines and specifies construction methods,
materials, quality and safety standards and
ensures that equipment operation and
maintenance comply with design specifications;

• designs structures such as roads, dams, bridges,

5

6

7

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Civil engineers usually possess an accredited three or
four-year degree in civil engineering or engineering
science or an accredited Higher National Diploma or
Certificate. The status of 'chartered engineer' is
achieved through the completion of postgraduate
training and membership of a chartered engineering
institution. The status of 'incorporated engineer' is
obtained upon the completion of further training at
work and associate membership of a chartered
engineering institution.

• organises and plans projects, arranges work
schedules, carries out inspection work and plans
maintenance control;

• organises and establishes control systems to
monitor operational efficiency and performance
of materials and systems.

RELATED JOB TITLES
TASKS

8

railways, hydraulic systems, sewerage systems,
industrial and other buildings and plans the layout
of tunnels, wells and construction shafts;

• undertakes research and advises on mineral
deposits, soil mechanics, concrete technology,
hydraulics, water and waste water treatment
processes and other civil engineering matters;

9
72

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

City engineer
Civil engineer
Mining engineer
Municipal engineer
Petroleum engineer
Structural engineer

2123 ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS

Mechanical engineers undertake research and design,
direct the manufacture and manage the operation and
maintenance of engines, machines, aircraft, vehicle
and ships' structures and other mechanical items.

Electrical engineers undertake research and design,
direct construction and manage the operation and
maintenance of electrical equipment, power stations
and other electrical products and systems.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Mechanical engineers usually possess an accredited
university degree. After qualifying, periods of
appropriate training and experience are required
before membership of a chartered engineering
institution. Incorporated engineers possess an
accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA award or
a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an NVQ/SVQ
at Level 4, followed by periods of training and
relevant experience.

Electrical engineers usually possess an accredited
university degree. After qualifying, periods of
appropriate training and experience are required
before membership of a chartered engineering
institution. Incorporated engineers possess an
accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA award or
a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an NVQ/SVQ
at Level 4. All routes are followed by periods of
appropriate training and relevant experience.

TASKS

TASKS

• undertakes research and advises on energy use,

• supervises, controls and monitors the operation

materials handling, thermodynamic processes,
fluid mechanics, vehicles and environmental
controls;

of electrical generation, transmission and
distribution systems;

• determines materials, equipment, piping,
capacities, layout of plant or system and
specification for manufacture;

• designs mechanical equipment, such as steam,
internal combustion and other non-electrical
motors for railway locomotives, road vehicles,
aeroplanes and other machinery;

• determines and specifies manufacturing methods
of electrical systems;

Major Group 2

2122 MECHANICAL ENGINEERS

1

2

3

4

• ensures that manufacture, operation and
maintenance comply with design specifications
and contractual arrangements;

• organises and establishes control systems to
monitor the performance and safety of electrical
assemblies and systems.

5

• ensures that equipment, operation and
maintenance comply with design specifications
and safety standards;

• organises and establishes control systems to
monitor operational efficiency and performance
of materials and systems.

RELATED JOB TITLES

6

Electrical engineer (professional)
Generating engineer (electricity supplier)
Power engineer
Power transmission engineer

7

RELATED JOB TITLES
Aeronautical engineer (professional)
Automobile engineer (professional)
Hydraulic engineer (professional)
Marine engineer (professional)
Mechanical engineer (professional)
Welding engineer (professional)

2124 ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS
Electronics engineers undertake research and design,
direct construction and manage the operation and
maintenance of electronic motors, communications
systems, microwave systems, and other electronic
equipment.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

73

Major Group 2

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Electronics engineers usually possess an accredited
university degree. After qualifying, periods of
appropriate training and experience are required
before membership of a chartered engineering
institution. Incorporated engineers possess an
accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA award or
a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an NVQ/SVQ
at Level 4. All routes are followed by periods of
appropriate training and relevant experience.

1
TASKS

• undertakes research and advises on all aspects
of telecommunications equipment, radar,
telemetry and remote control systems, data
processing equipment, microwaves and other
electronic equipment;

2

• determines and specifies appropriate production

7

8

achieve physical and/or chemical change for oil,
pharmaceutical, synthetic, plastic, food and other
products;

• designs, controls and constructs process plants
to manufacture products;

• ensures that production methods, materials and
quality standards conform to specifications and
safety requirements;

• organises and establishes control systems to

• prepares reports, feasibility studies and costings

• tests, diagnoses faults and undertakes repair of

maintenance and control of processing plant;
for major investments in processing facilities for
increased capacity and novel product
manufacture.

electronic equipment.

RELATED JOB TITLES

6

• undertakes research and develops processes to

• manages the safe and efficient operation,

monitor performance and evaluate designs;

5

TASKS

and/or installation methods and quality and safety
standards;

3

4

appropriate training and experience are required
before membership of a chartered engineering
institution. Incorporated engineers possess an
accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA award or
a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an NVQ/SVQ
at Level 4. All routes are followed by periods of
appropriate training and relevant experience.

Broadcasting engineer (professional)
Electronics engineer (professional)
Microwave engineer
Radar engineer (research)
Radio engineer (professional)

2125 CHEMICAL ENGINEERS
Chemical engineers undertake research on
commercial scale chemical processes and processed
products, design and provide specifications and
direct the construction, operation, maintenance and
repair of chemical plants and control systems.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Chemical engineers usually possess an accredited
university degree. After qualifying, periods of

9
74

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Chemical engineer
Plastics engineer (professional)

2126 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT
ENGINEERS
Design and development engineers conceive
engineering designs from product ideas or
requirements in mechanical, electrical and electronic
engineering.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Design and development engineers usually possess
an accredited university degree. After qualifying,
periods of appropriate training and experience are
required before membership of a chartered
engineering institution. Incorporated engineers

award or a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an
NVQ/SVQ at Level 4. All routes are followed by
periods of appropriate training and relevant
experience.

TASKS

Major Group 2

possess an accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA
award or a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an
NVQ/SVQ at Level 4. All routes are followed by
periods of appropriate training and relevant
experience.

TASKS

• studies existing and alternative production
• assesses product requirements, including costs,
manufacturing feasibility
requirements;

and market

• prepares working designs for steam, aero,
turbine, marine and electrical engines,
mechanical instruments, aircraft and missile
structures, vehicle and ship structures, plant and
machinery equipment, domestic electrical
appliances and electronic computing and
telecommunications equipment;

• arranges construction and testing of model or
prototype and modifies design if necessary;

• produces final design information for use in
preparation of layouts, parts lists, etc.;

methods, regarding work flow, plant layout, types
of machinery and cost;

• recommends optimum equipment and layout and
prepares drawings and specifications;

1

• devises production control methods to monitor
operational efficiency;

• investigates and eliminates potential hazards and
bottlenecks in production;

2

• advises management on new production
methods, techniques and equipment;

• liaises with materials buying, storing and
controlling departments to ensure a steady flow
of supplies.

3

• prepares specifications for materials and other
components.
RELATED JOB TITLES
RELATED JOB TITLES
Design consultant
Design engineer
Development engineer

2127 PRODUCTION AND PROCESS
ENGINEERS
Production and process engineers advise on and
direct technical aspects of production programmes
to ensure cost-effectiveness and efficiency.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Production and process engineers usually possess
an accredited university degree. After qualifying,
periods of appropriate training and experience are
required before membership of a chartered
engineering institution. Incorporated engineers
possess an accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA

4

Process engineer
Production consultant
Production engineer

5

2128 PLANNING AND QUALITY
CONTROL ENGINEERS
Planning and quality control engineers plan
production schedules, work sequences, and
manufacturing and processing procedures to ensure
accuracy, quality and reliability.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

7

Planning and quality control engineers usually
possess an accredited university degree. After
qualifying, periods of appropriate training and
experience are required before membership of a
chartered engineering institution. Incorporated
engineers possess an accredited university degree,
BTEC/SQA award or a Modern Apprenticeship

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

75

Major Group 2

leading to an NVQ/SVQ at Level 4. All routes are
followed by periods of appropriate training and
relevant experience.

TASKS

before membership of a chartered engineering
institution. Incorporated engineers possess an
accredited university degree, BTEC/SQA award or
a Modern Apprenticeship leading to an NVQ/SVQ
at Level 4. All routes are followed by periods of
appropriate training and relevant experience.

• analyses plans, drawings, specifications and
safety, quality, accuracy, reliability and
contractual requirements;

• prepares plan of sequence of operations and

1

completion dates for each phase of production
or processing;

• advises on existing plant machinery/layout and
any modifications required;

2

• devises inspection, testing and evaluation
methods for bought-in materials, components,
semi-finished and finished products;

• ensures accuracy of machines, jigs, fixtures,
gauges and other manufacturing and testing
equipment;

3

• prepares work flow charts for individual
departments and compiles detailed instructions
on processes, work methods and quality and
safety standards for workers.

4

5

6

7

• researches into problem areas to advance basic
knowledge, evaluate new theories and techniques
and to solve specific problems;

• establishes principles and techniques to improve
the quality, durability and performance of
materials such as textiles, glass, rubber, plastics,
ceramics, metals and alloys;

• designs new systems and equipment with regard
to cost, market requirements and feasibility of
manufacture;

• devises and implements control systems to
monitor operational efficiency and performance
of system and materials;

• prepare sketches, drawings and specifications
showing materials to be used, construction and
finishing methods and other details;

• examines and advises on patent applications;
RELATED JOB TITLES

• provides technical consultancy services.

Industrial engineer
Planning engineer
Production planner
Quality control engineer
Quality engineer

RELATED JOB TITLES

2129 ENGINEERING
PROFESSIONALS NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
engineering functions not elsewhere classified in
MINOR GROUP 212: Engineering Professionals.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8

TASKS

Chartered engineers usually possess an accredited
university degree. After qualifying, periods of
appropriate training and experience are required

9
76

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Agricultural engineer
Ceramics engineer
Food technologist
Fuel engineer
Materials scientist
Metallurgist
Patent agent
Project engineer
Traffic engineer

Information and communication technology professionals advise clients as to the effective
utilisation of information technology and develop and implement software for clients.

Major Group 2

MINOR GROUP 213
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
PROFESSIONALS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
2131 IT STRATEGY AND PLANNING PROFESSIONALS
2132 SOFTWARE PROFESSIONALS

2131 IT STRATEGY AND
PLANNING PROFESSIONALS
IT strategy and planning professionals provide advice
on the effective utilisation of information technology
in order to solve business problems or to enhance
the effectiveness of business functions.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent
qualification, although entry with other academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience is possible.
There are a variety of vocational, professional and
postgraduate qualifications available.

TASKS

1

RELATED JOB TITLES

2

Computer consultant
Software consultant

2132 SOFTWARE PROFESSIONALS
Software professionals are responsible for all aspects
of the design, application, development and
operation of software systems.

3

4

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent
qualification, although entry with other academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience is possible.
There are a variety of vocational, professional and
postgraduate qualifications available.

5

• liaises with clients in order to analyse business
procedure, clarify customer requirements and to
define the scope of existing software, hardware
and network arrangements;

• undertakes feasibility studies incorporating costs,
benefits, staffing implications and training needs,
and presents proposals to clients to introduce new
IT solutions or to modify existing systems;

• communicates the impact of emerging
technologies to clients and advises upon the
potential introduction of such technology;

• provides advice and assistance in the
procurement, provision, delivery, installation,
maintenance and use of information systems and
their environments.

TASKS

• examines existing software and determines

6

requirements for new/modified systems through
consultation with clients and staff;

• undertakes feasibility studies of software
solutions through specifying and costing
functional details, equipment, staffing and
operational procedures;

7

• investigates, plans, designs and develops
software solutions within stated constraints;

• installs, implements and maintains the reliability
and security of software systems as business
functions;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

77

Major Group 2

• writes operational documentation and provides
subsequent support and training for users.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Analyst-programmer
Computer programmer
Software engineer
Systems analyst
Systems designer

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
78

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Health professionals provide medical treatment for people and animals, conduct research
into treatment and drugs, and dispense pharmaceutical compounds.

Major Group 2

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 22
HEALTH PROFESSIONALS

MINOR GROUP 221
HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
Health professionals diagnose mental and physical injuries, disorders and diseases, provide
treatment with drugs, surgery, therapy and corrective devices, carry out routine medical
tests and recommend preventative action to patients, conduct research into treatments and
drugs, dispense pharmaceutical compounds, and diagnose and treat sick or injured animals.

1

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

2

2211
2212
2213
2214
2215
2216

MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS
PSYCHOLOGISTS
PHARMACISTS/PHARMACOLOGISTS
OPHTHALMIC OPTICIANS
DENTAL PRACTITIONERS
VETERINARIANS

3

4
2211 MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS

• diagnoses condition and prescribes and/or
administers appropriate treatment/surgery;

Medical practitioners diagnose mental and physical
injuries, disorders and diseases, prescribe and give
treatment, recommend preventative action and where
necessary, refer the patient to a specialist.

• administers routine medical tests and
inoculations against communicable diseases;

5

• supervises patient's progress and advises on diet,
exercise and other preventative action;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• refers patient to specialist where necessary and

Entrants require a university degree from a medical
school recognised by the General Medical Council
followed by a year of pre-registration training as a
house officer. Once the pre-registration period is
completed, doctors undertake up to two years
postgraduate training in a chosen speciality.

• prepares and delivers lectures, undertakes

TASKS

• examines patient, arranges for any necessary
x-rays or other tests and interprets results;

liaises with specialist;

6

research, and conducts and participates in clinical
trials.

7
RELATED JOB TITLES
Anaesthetist
Consultant (hospital service)
Doctor
General practitioner
Medical practitioner

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

79

Major Group 2

1

Physician
Psychiatrist
Psycho-analyst
Registrar (hospital service)
Surgeon

compound and dispense drugs and medicaments in
hospitals and pharmacies.

2212 PSYCHOLOGISTS

Entrants possess a degree in pharmacy. To register
with the Royal Pharmaceutical Society, entrants must
have completed a one year period of training and
passed a registration exam.

Psychologists study and assess emotional, cognitive
and behavioural processes and abnormalities in
human beings and animals and how these are affected
by genetic, physical and social factors.

TASKS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

2

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Entrants require a degree in psychology recognised
by the British Psychology Society. A variety of
postgraduate and professional qualifications relating
to different areas of psychology are available and
may be required for certain posts.

• prepares or directs the preparation of prescribed
medicaments in liquid, powder, tablet, ointment
or other form;

• checks that recommended doses are not being
exceeded and that instructions are understood by
patients;

• maintains prescription files and records issue of

3

TASKS

• develops and administers tests to measure
intelligence, abilities, aptitudes, etc. and assesses
results;

4

• develops treatment and guidance methods and
gives treatment or guidance using a variety of
therapy and counselling techniques;

narcotics, poisons and other habit-forming drugs;

• liaises with other professionals regarding the
development, manufacturing and testing of drugs;

• tests and analyses drugs to determine their
identity, purity and strength;

• ensures that drugs and medicaments are in good
supply and are stored properly.

• observes and experiments on humans and animals

5

to measure mental and physical characteristics;
physical factors on thought and behaviour;

• studies psychological factors in the treatment and
prevention of mental illness or emotional and
personality disorders.

6

7

8

RELATED JOB TITLES

• analyses the effect of hereditary, social and
Chemist (pharmaceutical/retail)
Druggist
Pharmaceutical chemist
Pharmacist
Pharmacologist

RELATED JOB TITLES

2214 OPHTHALMIC OPTICIANS

Clinical psychologist
Psychologist
Psychometrist

Ophthalmic opticians test patient's vision, diagnose
defects and disorders and prescribe glasses or contact
lenses as required.

2213 PHARMACISTS/
PHARMACOLOGISTS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Pharmacists/pharmacologists advise and participate
in the development and testing of new drugs and

Entrants require a degree in Optometry and must have
passed the Professional Qualifying Examination of the

9
80

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

TASKS

• refers patient to specialist, where necessary;
• prepares and delivers lectures, undertakes
research, and conducts and participates in clinical
trials.

• examines eyes and tests vision of patient;
• prescribes, supplies and fits appropriate spectacle
lenses, contact lenses or other aids;

• advises patient on proper use of glasses, contact
lenses and other aids, and on appropriate lighting
conditions for reading and working;

Major Group 2

College of Optometrists. Advanced training in
specialised areas is available.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Dental surgeon
Dentist
Orthodontist
Periodontist

1

• refers patient to a specialist, where necessary;
• carries out research with glass and lens
manufacturers.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Ophthalmic optician
Optometrist

2215 DENTAL PRACTITIONERS
Dental practitioners diagnose dental and oral
diseases, injuries and disorders, prescribe and
administer treatment, recommend preventative action
and, where necessary, refer the patient to a specialist.

2216 VETERINARIANS
Veterinarians diagnose and treat animal injuries,
diseases and disorders, and advise on preventative
action.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

2

3

Entrants will require a university degree in veterinary
science. Pre-entry experience in a veterinary practice
may be required for entry to a university veterinary
school.

4

TASKS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• examines animal and arranges or undertakes any

Entrants require a university degree and must have
completed a period of postgraduate vocational
training. Specialist fields require further study and
training.

• diagnoses condition and prescribes and

TASKS

• examines patient's teeth, gums and jaw, using
dental and x-ray equipment;

• administers local or general anaesthetics;

necessary x-ray or other tests;

5

administers appropriate drugs, dressings, etc.;

• performs routine medical tests and inoculates
animals against communicable diseases;

6

• administers local or general anaesthetics and
performs surgery;

• investigates outbreaks of animal diseases and
advises owners on feeding, breeding and general
care.

7

• drills, prepares and fills cavities in teeth;
• constructs and fits braces, inlays, dentures and
other appliances;

• supervises patient's progress and advises on
preventative action;

RELATED JOB TITLES

8

Veterinarian
Veterinary officer
Veterinary surgeon

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

81

Major Group 2

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 23
TEACHING AND RESEARCH PROFESSIONALS
Job holders in this sub-major group plan, organise and undertake teaching and research
activities within educational establishments, and inspect schools and training establishments.

MINOR GROUP 231
TEACHING PROFESSIONALS

1

Teaching professionals plan, organise and provide instruction in academic, technical,
vocational, diversionary and other subjects and inspect schools and training establishments.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
2311
2312
2313
2314
2315

HIGHER EDUCATION TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
FURTHER EDUCATION TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
EDUCATION OFFICERS, SCHOOL INSPECTORS
SECONDARY EDUCATION TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
PRIMARY AND NURSERY EDUCATION TEACHING
PROFESSIONALS
2316 SPECIAL NEEDS EDUCATION TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
2317 REGISTRARS AND SENIOR ADMINISTRATORS OF
EDUCATIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS
2319 TEACHING PROFESSIONALS NEC

2

3

4

5

6

2311 HIGHER EDUCATION
TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
Higher education teaching professionals deliver
lectures and teach students to at least first degree
level, undertake research and write journal articles
and books in their chosen field of study.

TASKS

• prepares, delivers and directs lectures, seminars
and tutorials;

• prepares, administers and marks examinations,
essays and other assignments;

• advises students on academic matters and
encourages independent research;

7

8

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry will require a good honours first degree plus a
higher degree or an equivalent professional
qualification. For vocational subjects, practical
experience and additional qualifications may also
be required.

9
82

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

• participates in decision making processes
regarding curricula, budgetary, departmental and
other matters;

• directs the work of postgraduate students;
• undertakes research, writes articles and books
and attends conferences and other meetings.

Lecturer (higher education, university)
Polytechnic lecturer
Professor (university)
Reader
University lecturer

2313 EDUCATION OFFICERS,
SCHOOL INSPECTORS
Education officers plan, organise and direct the
educational activities and resources in a local
authority education area, and undertake inspections
of schools and other training establishments
excluding universities.

2312 FURTHER EDUCATION
TEACHING PROFESSIONALS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Further education teaching professionals supervise
and teach trade, technical, commercial, adult
education, secondary and post-secondary courses to
students beyond minimum school leaving age.

Education officers usually posses an educationrelated degree or postgraduate qualification and have
gained relevant experience in teaching and/or school
management. School inspectors must have
completed a training and assessment programme in
school inspection.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Further education lecturers will usually possess a
professional or academic qualification in the subject
area they intend to teach, plus relevant professional,
industrial or business experience. Many employers
require entrants to possess teaching qualifications.

• prepares, delivers and directs lectures, seminars
and tutorials;

• prepares, administers and marks examinations,
essays and other assignments;

• arranges instructional visits and periods of
employment experience for students;

• assists with the administration of teaching and
the arranging of timetables;

• liaises with other professional and commercial
organisations to review course content.

1

2

TASKS

• advises on all aspects of education and ensures
that all statutory educational requirements are
being met;

3

• plans and advises on the provision of special
schools for the physically and mentally
handicapped;

TASKS

Major Group 2

RELATED JOB TITLES

• appoints and controls teaching staff;

4

• verifies that school buildings are adequately
maintained;

• arranges for the provision of school medical and
meals services;

5

• observes teaching, assesses learning level and
discusses any apparent faults with teachers, heads
of department and head teachers;

• prepares reports on schools concerning teaching
standards, educational standards being achieved,
the spiritual, moral and social development of
pupils, resource management etc.

6

RELATED JOB TITLES

7

Curriculum development officer
Director of education
Education inspector
Education officer
HM Inspector of Schools

8

RELATED JOB TITLES
College lecturer
Lecturer
Lecturer (further education)
Teacher (further education)

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

83

Major Group 2

2314 SECONDARY EDUCATION
TEACHING PROFESSIONALS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Secondary (and middle school deemed secondary)
education teaching professionals plan, organise and
provide instruction in one or more subjects, including
physical education and diversionary activities, within
a prescribed curriculum in a secondary or secondary/
middle school.

Entry is only possible with a Bachelor of Education
or other relevant degree followed by a Postgraduate
Certificate of Education. Further and higher
professional qualifications are required for some
teaching posts.

TASKS

1

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

2

Entry is only possible with a Bachelor of Education
or other relevant degree followed by a Postgraduate
Certificate of Education. Further and higher
professional qualifications are required for some
teaching posts.

• prepares courses and teaches a range of subjects;
• prepares, assigns and corrects exercises to record
and evaluate students progress;

• supervises students in classroom and maintains
discipline;

• teaches simple songs and rhymes and reads
stories to promote language development;

TASKS

3

• prepares courses in accordance with curriculum

other education professionals.

requirements and teaches one or more subjects;

• prepares, assigns and corrects exercises and

4

• discusses progress with student, parents and/or

examinations to record and evaluate students'
progress;

• supervises any practical work and maintains
classroom discipline;

• discusses progress with student, parents and/or

RELATED JOB TITLES
Head teacher (primary/middle school)
Infant teacher
Junior school teacher
Nursery school teacher
Primary school teacher

other education professionals;

5

• assists with or plans and develops curriculum and
rota of teaching duties.

6

RELATED JOB TITLES
Head teacher (secondary school)
Secondary school teacher
Teacher (secondary school)

7

8

2315 PRIMARY AND NURSERY
EDUCATION TEACHING
PROFESSIONALS
Primary (and middle school deemed primary) and
nursery education teaching professionals plan,
organise and provide instruction to children at all
levels up to the age of entry into secondary education.

9
84

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

2316 SPECIAL NEEDS EDUCATION
TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
Special needs education teaching professionals
organise and provide instruction at a variety of
different levels to children who are partially blind,
deaf, physically or mentally handicapped, epileptic
or suffering from speech defects or other learning
difficulties.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is only possible with a Bachelor of Education
or other relevant degree followed by a Postgraduate
Certificate of Education. Further training for
specialist needs teaching is available for those with
sufficient teaching experience and is mandatory in
many areas.

• arranges for evaluation of management,

• assesses student's abilities and needs and devises

accounting, information storage and retrieval and
other facilities;

curriculum and rota of teaching duties
accordingly;

• controls administrative aspects of student

• gives instruction, using techniques appropriate
to the student's handicap;

registration and admission;

• acts as secretary to statutory and other bodies/

• encourages the student to develop self-help skills

committees associated with the educational
establishment;

to circumvent the limitations imposed by their
disability;

• organises examinations, necessary invigilations

• prepares, assigns and corrects exercises to record
and evaluate students progress;

• supervises students in classroom and maintains
discipline;

• discusses student's progress with parents and
other staff.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Head teacher (special school)
Special needs teacher
Teacher (special school)

2317 REGISTRARS AND SENIOR
ADMINISTRATORS OF
EDUCATIONAL
ESTABLISHMENTS
Workers in this unit group plan, organise, direct and
co-ordinate the administrative work and financial
resources of a university, college or other educational
establishment.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent
qualification and have gained relevant experience
in the field of education. Specialist training courses
and professional qualifications are available.

Major Group 2

TASKS

and any security procedures required;

• arranges for the preparation, publication and

1

despatch of syllabuses and other official
documents.

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Bursar
Registrar (educational services)
University administrator

3
2319 TEACHING PROFESSIONALS
NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of other
education and teaching occupations not elsewhere
classified in MINOR GROUP 231: Teaching
Professionals.

4

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5

Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications, professional qualifications and/or
relevant experience.

6
TASKS

• inspects and advises on the work of educational,
training and similar establishments;

• designs and implements methods of assessing the

7

performance of students, co-ordinates and
undertakes the evaluation of assessments and
awards grades of merit based upon performance;

TASKS

• co-ordinates the activities of private music and
• considers staffing, financial, material and other
short and long term needs;

dancing schools, training centres and similar
establishments;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

85

Major Group 2

• provides private academic, vocational and other
instruction to individuals or groups;

• teaches English as a foreign language and assists
in the tuition of foreign languages.

RELATED JOB TITLES

1

Examiner (examination board)
Nursery manager (day nursery)
Owner (children's nursery)
Principal (dancing school/evening institute)
Private tutor
Teacher of English as a foreign language
TEFL

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
86

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Research professionals are responsible for planning, directing and undertaking scientific,
quantitative and qualitative research through the application of theoretical principles and
practical techniques in order to address a research objective.

Major Group 2

MINOR GROUP 232
RESEARCH PROFESSIONALS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
2321 SCIENTIFIC RESEARCHERS
2322 SOCIAL SCIENCE RESEARCHERS
2329 RESEARCHERS NEC

2321 SCIENTIFIC RESEARCHERS

RELATED JOB TITLES

Scientific researchers undertake the systematic study
of the nature and behaviour of natural phenomena
based upon scientific observation, experiment and
measurement.

Research associate (medical)
Research scientist
Scientific officer
Scientist

1

2

3
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is most common with a degree or equivalent
qualification, but is possible with other academic
qualifications. Further training is typically provided
through specialist short courses and the attainment
of professional qualifications.

2322 SOCIAL SCIENCE
RESEARCHERS
Social science researchers study the origin, structure
and characteristics of language, analyse the behaviour
of human beings, organise the collection of
information for social surveys and independent
research, and undertake subsequent analysis.

TASKS

• plans, directs and undertakes research into natural
phenomena;

• provides technical advisory and consulting
services;

• designs tests and experiments to address research

4

5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is most common with a degree or equivalent
qualification but is possible with other academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience.

6

objective and find solutions;

• applies models and techniques to medical,
industrial, agricultural, military and similar
applications;

• analyses results and writes up results of tests and
experiments undertaken;

• presents results of scientific research to sponsors,
addresses conferences and publishes articles
outlining the methodology and results of research
undertaken.

TASKS

• traces the evolution of word and language forms,

7

compares grammatical structures and analyses the
relationships between ancient parent and modern
languages;

• compiles and analyses economic, demographic,
legal, political, social and other data to address
research objective;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

87

Major Group 2

1

2

3

4

5

• administers questionnaires, carries out

• undertakes research on people, incidents and

interviews, organises focus groups and
implements other social research tools;

other topics of interest for news, current affairs
programmes, documentaries and entertainment
broadcasts.

• undertakes analysis of data, presents results of
research to sponsors, the media and other
interested organisations, addresses conferences
and publishes articles outlining the methodology
and results of research undertaken.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Anthropologist
Archaeologist
Geographer
Historian
Philologist
Sociologist

2329 RESEARCHERS NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
research activities not elsewhere classified in
MINOR GROUP 232: Research Professionals.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is most common with a degree or equivalent
qualification but is possible with other academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience.

TASKS

6

• design and develop an appropriate research
methodology in order to address the research
objective;

• compiles and analyses quantitative and

7

qualitative data;

• prepare reports and present results to summarise
main findings and conclusions;

• advise government, private organisations and
special interest groups on policy issues;

8

• writes journal articles, books, and addresses
conferences, seminars and the media to reveal
research findings;

9
88

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Research assistant (university)
Research associate (university)
Researcher (broadcasting)
University research fellow

Business and public service professionals advise and act on behalf of clients in legal matters,
preside over judicial proceedings, collect and analyse financial information, perform
accounting duties, advise on business and management matters, and perform a variety of
other professional occupations within the public and voluntary sectors.

MINOR GROUP 241
LEGAL PROFESSIONALS

Major Group 2

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 24
BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE PROFESSIONALS

1

Legal professionals advise and act on behalf of individuals, businesses, organisations and
government in legal matters and preside over judicial proceedings.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

2

2411 SOLICITORS AND LAWYERS, JUDGES AND CORONERS
2419 LEGAL PROFESSIONALS NEC

3
2411 SOLICITORS AND LAWYERS,
JUDGES AND CORONERS

• advises client on the basis of legal knowledge,

Workers in this unit group advise and act upon behalf
of individuals, organisations, businesses and
government departments in legal matters, prepare
and conduct court cases on behalf of clients, preside
over judicial proceedings, and pronounce
judgements within a variety of court settings and
tribunals.

• drafts pleadings and questions in preparation for

research and past precedent as to whether to
proceed with legal action;
court cases, appears in court to present evidence
to the judge and jury, cross examine witnesses
and sum up why the court should decide in their
clients favour;

• undertakes legal business on behalf of client in
areas of business law, probate, conveyancing and
litigation and acts as trustee or executor if required;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry to training usually requires a qualifying law
degree or postgraduate diploma. Entrants then
undertake a further year of academic training and
then complete up to four years of assessed supervised
experience in legal practice. The position of judge
is obtained by appointment of those who have
substantial post qualifying experience in legal
practice.

4

5

• instructs counsel in higher and lower courts and
pleads cases in lower courts as appropriate;

• hears, reads and evaluates evidence, and instructs
or advises the jury on points of law or procedure;

6

• conducts trials according to rules of procedure,
announces the verdict and passes sentence and/
or awards costs and damages.

7

RELATED JOB TITLES
TASKS

• becomes acquainted with the facts of a case
through reading statements, law reports, and
consulting with clients or other professionals;

Articled clerk
Barrister
Coroner
Judge
Solicitor

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

89

Major Group 2

2419 LEGAL PROFESSIONALS NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of other
professional legal occupations not elsewhere
classified in MINOR GROUP 241: Legal
Professionals.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1

2

Entry to training usually requires a qualifying law
degree or postgraduate diploma. Entrants then
undertake a further year of academic training and
then complete up to four years of assessed supervised
experience in legal practice. Entrants may also
require up to five years post qualifying experience
in legal practice.

TASKS

3

• co-ordinates the activities of magistrates courts
and advises magistrates on law and legal
procedure;

• provides legal advice to individuals within

4

Citizens Advice Bureaux, Law Centres and other
such establishments;

• drafts and negotiates contracts on behalf of
employers;

• advises employers, local and national
government and other organisations on aspects
of law and legislative implications of decisions
made;

5

• represents public and private organisations in
court as necessary.

6
RELATED JOB TITLES

7

Clerk of the court
Clerk to the justices
Legal advisor
Legal officer

8

9
90

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Business and statistical professionals collect and analyse financial and other material,
perform accountancy duties and advise industrial, commercial and other establishments
on management and business matters.

Major Group 2

MINOR GROUP 242
BUSINESS AND STATISTICAL PROFESSIONALS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
2421 CHARTERED AND CERTIFIED ACCOUNTANTS
2422 MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTANTS
2423 MANAGEMENT CONSULTANTS, ACTUARIES, ECONOMISTS
AND STATISTICIANS

2421 CHARTERED AND CERTIFIED
ACCOUNTANTS
Chartered and Certified Accountants provide
accounting and auditing services and advise clients
on financial matters.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent
qualification. To qualify as an accountant, entrants
must undertake a period of training within an
approved organisation and successfully complete
professional examinations. Exemptions to some
professional examinations are available to those with
appropriate academic qualifications.

TASKS

• plans and oversees implementation of
accountancy system and policies;

• prepares financial documents and reports for
management, shareholders, statutory or other
bodies;

• audits accounts and book-keeping records;
• prepares tax returns, advises on tax problems and
contests disputed claim before tax official;

• conducts financial investigations concerning
insolvency, fraud, possible mergers, etc.

1

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Accountant (qualified)
Auditor (qualified)
Certified accountant
Chartered accountant
Company accountant

3

2422 MANAGEMENT
ACCOUNTANTS

4

Management accountants collect and analyse
financial information and perform other accounting
duties required by management for the planning and
control of an establishment's income and
expenditure.

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess a degree or equivalent
qualification. To qualify as an accountant, entrants
must gain practical experience with an employer and
successfully complete professional examinations.
Exemptions to some professional examinations are
available to those with appropriate academic
qualifications.

6

7

TASKS

• evaluates financial information for management

8

purposes;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

91

Major Group 2

• liaises with management and other professionals
to compile budgets and other costs;

• prepares periodic accounts, budgetary reviews
and financial forecasts;

• conducts investigations and advises management
on financial aspects of productivity, stock
holding, sales, new products, etc.

• advises governments, commercial enterprises,
organisations and other clients in light of research
findings;

• addresses seminars, conferences and the media
to present results of research activity or to express
professional views.

RELATED JOB TITLES
RELATED JOB TITLES

1

2

3

4

5

6

Cost accountant (qualified)
Cost and management accountant (qualified)
Management accountant (qualified)
Works accountant (qualified)

2423 MANAGEMENT
CONSULTANTS, ACTUARIES,
ECONOMISTS AND
STATISTICIANS
Workers in this unit group advise industrial,
commercial and other establishments on a variety of
management, personnel, computing and technical
matters, and apply theoretical principles and practical
techniques to analyse and interpret data used to assist
in the formulation of financial, business and
economic policies.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is most common with a degree or equivalent
qualification, but is possible with other academic
qualifications. Professional qualifications are
available and mandatory for actuarial occupations.

TASKS

• assesses the functions, objectives and
requirements of the organisation seeking advice;

7

• identifies problems concerned with strategy,
policy, markets, organisation, computing
facilities, procedures and methods;

8

• determines the appropriate method of data
collection and research methodology, and
analyses and interprets information gained and
formulates recommendations;

9
92

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Actuary
Business analyst
Economist
Management consultant
Management services officer
Statistician

Architects, town planners and surveyors conduct surveys to determine the exact position
of natural and constructed features, prepare bills of quantities for construction projects,
and design and plan the layout of buildings for commercial, residential, industrial and
other uses.

Major Group 2

MINOR GROUP 243
ARCHITECTS, TOWN PLANNERS, SURVEYORS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
2431
2432
2433
2434

ARCHITECTS
TOWN PLANNERS
QUANTITY SURVEYORS
CHARTERED SURVEYORS (NOT QUANTITY SURVEYORS)

1

2
2431 ARCHITECTS

RELATED JOB TITLES

Architects plan and design the construction and
development of buildings and land areas with regard
to functional and aesthetic requirements.

Architect
Architectural consultant
Chartered architect
Landscape architect

3

2432 TOWN PLANNERS

4

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants require a professional qualification in
architecture that will encompass an accredited degree
and postgraduate qualification, and at least two years
practical experience.

TASKS

• liaises with client and other professionals to
establish building type, style, cost limitations and
landscaping requirements;

• studies condition and characteristics of site,
taking into account drainage, topsoil, trees, rock
formations, etc.;

• analyses site survey and advises client on
development and construction details and ensures
that proposed design blends in with the
surrounding area;

Town planners direct or undertake the planning of
the layout and the co-ordination of plans for the
development of urban and rural areas.

5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess either an accredited degree
or postgraduate qualification and must have
completed at least two years work experience in town
planning before gaining professional status.

TASKS

7

• analyses information to establish the nature,

• prepares detailed scale drawings and

extent, growth rate and likely development
requirements of the area;

specifications for design and construction and
submits these for planning approval;

• consults statutory bodies and other interested

• monitors construction work in progress to ensure
compliance with specifications.

6

parties to ensure that local interests are catered
for and to evaluate competing development
proposals;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

93

Major Group 2

• drafts and presents graphic and narrative plans,

• examines tenders received, advises client on the

affecting the use of public and private land,
housing and transport facilities;

most acceptable and assists with preparation of
a contract document;

• examines and evaluates development proposals

• measures and values work in progress and

submitted and recommends acceptance,
modification or rejection;

examines any deviations from original contract;

• liaises with national and local government and

• measures and values completed contract for
authorisation of payment.

other bodies to advise on urban and regional
planning issues.
RELATED JOB TITLES

1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Planning officer (local government)
Town planner
Town planning consultant

Quantity surveyor
Quantity surveyor's assistant
Survey technician (quantity surveying)

2
2433 QUANTITY SURVEYORS

3

4

5

Quantity surveyors advise on financial and
contractual matters relating to, and prepare bills of
quantities for, construction projects and provide
other support functions concerning the financing and
materials required for building projects.

2434 CHARTERED SURVEYORS
(NOT QUANTITY
SURVEYORS)
Chartered surveyors conduct surveys related to the
measurement, management, valuation and
development of land, natural resources, buildings,
other types of property, and infrastructure such as
harbours, roads and railway lines.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is through professional training and
membership of professional organisations. Entry to
professional examinations will require GCSEs/S
grades and A levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award,
a degree or equivalent qualification. Candidates
usually undertake a period of probationary training
and professional assessment.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry requirements to professional bodies vary.
Entrants usually possess an accredited degree,
equivalent qualification and/or postgraduate
qualification. Entrants must also have successfully
completed a probationary training period and
professional assessment.

6
TASKS
TASKS

• liaises with client on project costs, formulates
detailed cost plan and advises contractors and
engineers to ensure that they remain within cost
limit;

• surveys, measures and describes land surfaces

• examines plans and specifications and prepares

• surveys mines, prepares drawings of surfaces,

details of the material and labour required for
the project;

hazards and other features to control the extent
and direction of mining;

• prepares bills of quantities for use by contractors

• surveys buildings to determine necessary

7

8

when tendering for work;

9
94

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

to establish property boundaries and to aid with
construction or cartographic work;

alterations and repairs;

Major Group 2

• measures shore lines, elevations and underwater
contours, establishes high and low water marks,
plots shore features and defines navigable
channels.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Building surveyor
Chartered surveyor
Land surveyor
Mining surveyor
Surveyor
Surveyor and estimator

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

95

Major Group 2

MINOR GROUP 244
PUBLIC SERVICE PROFESSIONALS
Workers in this minor group advise on the formulation and implementation of government
policy, direct the activities of government departments; provide information, advice and
support to protect the welfare of vulnerable groups; supervise, counsel and help offenders;
and provide spiritual motivation and guidance.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
2441
2442
2443
2444

1

PUBLIC SERVICE ADMINISTRATIVE PROFESSIONALS
SOCIAL WORKERS
PROBATION OFFICERS
CLERGY

2

3

4

2441 PUBLIC SERVICE
ADMINISTRATIVE
PROFESSIONALS

• co-ordinates and directs the activities of Inland

Public service administrative professionals advise on
the implementation and formulation of government
policy, develops and implements the administrative
policies of government departments, and coordinates and directs the resources and activities of
offices of local and national government departments.

• develops and implements administrative polices

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5

Entrants typically possess a degree or an equivalent
qualification. Entry is also possible by internal
promotion for those with appropriate experience.
Training is typically provided on-the-job in the form
of short courses for specialist areas.

6
TASKS

Revenue offices, Job Centres, Benefits Agency
offices and other local offices of national
government;
of government departments, including pay
arrangements, personnel and training policies and
capital projects;

• registers and maintains records of all births,
deaths and marriages in local authority area,
issues appropriate certificates and reports any
suspicious causes of death to the coroner.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Area officer (local government)
Civil servant (grade 6,7)
Divisional officer (local government)
Principal/Grade 7 (government)
Registrar of births, deaths and marriages
Superintendent registrar

• advises government on the interpretation and
implementation of policy decisions, acts and
regulations, and provides technical assistance in
the formulation of government policy;

7

• co-ordinates the activities of departmental staff,
assigns tasks and responsibilities and makes
changes in procedures to deal with variations in
workload;

8

9
96

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

2442 SOCIAL WORKERS
Social workers provide information, advice and
support to protect the welfare of vulnerable groups
including children, young people, families under
stress, people with disabilities, elderly people and
people who are mentally or physically ill.

TASKS

• produces pre-sentence reports to the court about
Both graduate and non-graduate entry is possible.
Entrants are required to take the Diploma of Social
Work professional qualification. Exemptions may
be possible for those with relevant qualifications and/
or experience.

TASKS

an individual's crime, their personal
circumstances, the suitability of sentencing, the
likelihood of re-offending and the future risk to
the public;

• enforces court orders and serves the public by
providing a wide range of supervision
programmes for those in receipt of a community
sentence;

• liaises with other health and social care

• draw up probation plans with offenders and help

professionals to identify those in need and at risk
within the local community;

them follow it, advise them on any work and help
them with any family or social problems;

• interviews individuals and groups to assesses the

• works with prisoners in giving advice on

nature and extent of difficulties;

• arranges for further counselling or assistance in

Major Group 2

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

problems such as drug and alcohol abuse,
addressing training needs, finding work and
getting accommodation.

1

2

the form of financial or material help;

• attempts to resolve family problems and, if
necessary, arranges for children to be resettled
with foster parents or in a children's home;

RELATED JOB TITLES

3

• keeps case records and prepares reports.

Community service officer
Probation officer

RELATED JOB TITLES

2444 CLERGY

Child care officer
Child protection officer
Social worker
Team leader (social work)

Members of the clergy provide spiritual motivation
and guidance, conduct worship according to the form
of service of a particular faith/denomination and
perform related functions associated with religious
beliefs and practices.

2443 PROBATION OFFICERS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Probation officers supervise, counsel and help
offenders before trial, during any prison or
community sentence and on their release from prison.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Candidates are recruited with a variety of academic
qualifications or with relevant experience. In
England and Wales off- and on-the-job training is
provided leading to NVQ in Community Care at
Level 4. In Scotland, entry requirements are the same
as for social workers.

4

Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades, A levels/
H grades, a degree or equivalent qualification.
Candidates must pass a residential selection procedure.
Entrants then attend theological college where training
includes theological instruction and practical pastoral
experience. Training can last up to six years depending
upon age, experience and denomination.

5

6

7

TASKS

• prepares and delivers sermons and talks and leads

8

congregation in worship;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

97

Major Group 2

• interprets doctrines and instructs intending clergy
members in religious principles and practices;

• performs marriages, funerals, christenings and
other special religious services;

• visits members of the congregation in their homes
and in hospitals and counsels those in need of
spiritual or moral guidance;

• undertakes administration and social duties as
required.

1
RELATED JOB TITLES

2

Clergyman/woman
Clerk in holy orders
Deacon
Minister (religion)
Priest
Vicar

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
98

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Librarians and related professionals appraise, obtain, organise, develop and make available
collections of written and recorded material, art objects, pictures, artefacts and other items
of general and specialised interest.

Major Group 2

MINOR GROUP 245
LIBRARIANS AND RELATED PROFESSIONALS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
2451 LIBRARIANS
2452 ARCHIVISTS AND CURATORS

1

2451 LIBRARIANS

RELATED JOB TITLES

Librarians appraise, obtain, index, collate and make
available library acquisitions and organise and
control other library services.

Assistant librarian
Branch librarian
Chartered librarian
Librarian

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

2

2452 ARCHIVISTS AND CURATORS

Entry will require an accredited degree or
postgraduate qualification. Most postgraduate
courses require applicants to have had up to twelve
months work experience. Professional qualifications
and NVQs/SVQs in Information and Library Service
are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.

Archivists and curators collect, appraise and preserve
collections of recorded and other material of
historical interest.

TASKS

There are no formal academic requirements although
entrants usually possess a degree or higher degree.
Many postgraduate courses require applicants to
have gained relevant practical experience prior to
entry. Training is typically received on-the-job.
Professional qualifications leading to NVQs/SVQs
in Curatorial and Conservation Skills at Levels 3, 4
and 5 are available.

• selects and arranges for the acquisition of books,
periodicals, audio-visual and other material;

• collects, classifies and catalogues information,
books and other material;

• prepares and circulates abstracts, bibliographies,

3

4
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5

6

book lists, etc.;

• identifies the information needs of clients, seeks
out and evaluates information sources;

• establishes information storage systems to deal

TASKS

• examines, appraises and advises on acquisition

with queries and to maintain up to date records;

of exhibits, government papers and other
material;

• manages library borrowing and inter-library loan

• classifies material and arranges for its safe

facilities.

keeping and preservation;

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

99

Major Group 2

• maintains indexes, bibliographies and descriptive
details of archive material and arranges for
reproductions of items where necessary;

• liaises with school and other groups or
individuals, publicises exhibits and arranges
special displays for general, specialised or
educational interest;

• allows access to original material or material not
on display for researchers;

1

• answers verbal or written enquiries and gives
advice on exhibits or other material.

RELATED JOB TITLES

2

Archivist
Conservator
Curator

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
100

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

This major group covers occupations whose main tasks require experience and knowledge
of principles and practices necessary to assume operational responsibility and to give
technical support to Professionals in the natural sciences, engineering, life sciences, social
sciences, humanities and related fields and to Managers and Senior Officials.
The main tasks involve the operation and maintenance of complex equipment; legal, financial
and design services; the provision of information technology services; providing skilled support
to health and social care professionals; and serving in protective service occupations. Culture,
media and sports occupations are also included in this major group. Most occupations in this
major group will have an associated high-level vocational qualification, often involving a
substantial period of full-time training or further study. Some additional task-related training is
usually provided through a formal period of induction.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:

Major Group 3

MAJOR GROUP 3
ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL
OCCUPATIONS

1

2

3

31 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
311
312
313

SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS
DRAUGHTSPERSONS AND BUILDING INSPECTORS
IT SERVICE DELIVERY OCCUPATIONS

4

32 HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS
321
322
323

5

HEALTH ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
THERAPISTS
SOCIAL WELFARE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS

6

33 PROTECTIVE SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
331

PROTECTIVE SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

7

34 CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORTS OCCUPATIONS
341
342
343
344

ARTISTIC AND LITERARY OCCUPATIONS
DESIGN ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
MEDIA ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
SPORTS AND FITNESS OCCUPATIONS

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

101

Major Group 3

35 BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS
351
352
353
354
355
356

TRANSPORT ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
LEGAL ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
BUSINESS AND FINANCE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
SALES AND RELATED ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
CONSERVATION ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
PUBLIC SERVICE AND OTHER ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
102

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Science and technology associate professionals perform a variety of technical support
functions to scientists, technologists, engineers and architects, prepare technical drawings,
undertake building inspections, provide technical support for IT operations and users.

MINOR GROUP 311
SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS

Major Group 3

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 31
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS

1

Workers in this minor group perform a variety of technical support functions to assist the
work of scientists and technologists, assist in the design, development and maintenance of
electronic systems, perform technical quality assurance related tasks, support the work of
building and civil engineers, and perform various other technical support functions for
engineers.

2

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3111
3112
3113
3114
3115
3119

3

LABORATORY TECHNICIANS
ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONICS TECHNICIANS
ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS
BUILDING AND CIVIL ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS
QUALITY ASSURANCE TECHNICIANS
SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS NEC

4

5

3111 LABORATORY TECHNICIANS

TASKS

Laboratory technicians carry out routine laboratory
tests and perform a variety of technical support
functions requiring the application of established or
prescribed procedures and techniques to assist
scientists with their research, development, analysis
and testing.

• sets up and assists with the construction and the

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry varies from employer to employer. Entrants
usually possess GCSEs/S grades, an appropriate
BTEC/SQA award or a GNVQ/GSVQ. Professional
qualifications and Modern Apprenticeships are
available in some areas of work. Good eyesight, and
in some cases, normal colour vision are also required.

development of scientific apparatus for
experimental, demonstration or other purposes;

• prepares and analyses body fluids, secretions

6

and/or tissue to detect infections or to examine
the effects of different drugs;

• grows cultures of bacteria and viruses, prepares
tissue sections and other organic and inorganic
material for examination and stains and fixes
slides for microscope work;

7

• operates and services specialised scientific
equipment, undertakes prescribed measurements
and analyses and ensures that sterile conditions
necessary for some equipment are maintained;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

103

Major Group 3

• records and collates data obtained from
experimental work and documents all work
carried out.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Electrical technician
Electronics technician
Signals officer (MOD)

RELATED JOB TITLES
Cytology screener
Health physics monitor
Laboratory technician
Scientific assistant

1

3113 ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS
Engineering technicians perform a variety of
technical support functions to assist engineers with
the design, development, operation, installation and
maintenance of engineering systems and
constructions.

3112 ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONICS
TECHNICIANS

2

Electrical and electronics technicians perform a
variety of miscellaneous technical support functions
to assist with the design, development, installation,
operation and maintenance of electrical and
electronic systems.

3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants to training usually posses GCSEs/S grades.
Professional training consists either of full-time study
for a BTEC/SQA award followed by two years onthe-job training, or a Modern Apprenticeship leading
to an NVQ/SVQ at Level 3 or 4.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

4

Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, an
Intermediate GNVQ/GSVQ Level II or a BTEC/
SQA award. NVQs/SVQs in Servicing Electronic
Systems are available at Levels 2 and 3.

TASKS

• plans and prepares work and test schedules based
on specifications and drawings;

• sets up equipment, undertakes tests, takes

5

readings, performs calculations and records and
interprets data;

TASKS

• plans and prepares work and test schedules based
on specifications and drawings;

• sets up equipment, undertakes tests, takes

6

readings, performs calculations and records and
interprets data;

• plans installation methods, checks completed

7

installation for safety and controls or undertakes
the initial running of the new electrical or
electronic equipment or system;

• diagnoses and detects faults and implements
procedures to maintain efficient operation of
systems and equipment;

8

• visits and advises clients on the use and servicing
of electrical and electronic systems and
equipment.

9
104

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

• prepares estimates of materials, equipment and
labour required for engineering projects;

• diagnoses and detects faults and implements
procedures to maintain efficient operation of
systems and equipment;

• visits and advises clients on the use and servicing
of mechanical and chemical engineering products
and services.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Commissioning engineer
Contracts engineer
Engineering technician
Engineer's assistant
Technician engineer

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Building and civil engineering technicians perform
a variety of miscellaneous technical support
functions to assist civil and building engineers.

Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades, a BTEC/
SQA award or A levels/H grades. Training is
typically received on-the-job, supplemented by
training courses where instruction in specific
techniques is required. Various industry specific
NVQs/SVQs encompass aspects of quality control.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess a relevant BTEC/SQA
award or an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III. The
status of engineering technician is obtained after a
period of further training at work and upon gaining
the membership of a professional engineering
institution.

Major Group 3

3114 BUILDING AND CIVIL
ENGINEERING TECHNICIANS

TASKS

• sets up scientific, electronic, or other technical

1

equipment to perform functional and inspection
tests;

• analyses and interprets the results of tests
undertaken and writes up reports upon completion;

2

• supervises the work of routine inspection staff
TASKS

• sets up apparatus and equipment and undertakes
field and laboratory tests of soil and work
materials;

• performs calculations and collects, records and
interprets data;

and notes any defects reported;

• assists quality control engineers in undertaking
production audits;

3

• liaises with production engineers and staff to
maintain the quality of output and to develop
management quality systems.

• sets out construction site, supervises excavations
and marks out position of building work to be
undertaken;

• inspects construction materials and supervises
work of contractors to ensure compliance with
specifications and arranges remedial work as
necessary.

4

RELATED JOB TITLES
NDT technician
QA co-ordinator
Quality assurance technician

5

3119 SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
TECHNICIANS NEC
RELATED JOB TITLES
Building technician
Civil engineering technician
Structural engineering technician

3115 QUALITY ASSURANCE
TECHNICIANS
Quality assurance technicians perform a variety of
technical inspections, testing and monitoring tasks
to detect processing, manufacturing and other
defects.

Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
technical support functions not elsewhere classified
in MINOR GROUP 311: Science and Engineering
Technicians.

6

7

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry varies from employer to employer. Entrants
usually possess GCSEs/S grades, a BTEC/SQA
award or an Intermediate GNVQ/GSVQ Level II.
Professional qualifications are available and may be
required in some areas of work.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

105

Major Group 3

TASKS

• sets up apparatus for experimental,
demonstration or other purposes;

• undertakes tests and takes measurements and
readings;

• performs calculations and records and interprets
data;

• otherwise assists technologists as directed.

1
RELATED JOB TITLES

2

Materials technician
Technical assistant
Technical officer
Technician

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
106

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this minor group prepare technical drawings, plans and charts, give technical
assistance to planners and architects, and undertake inspections of buildings to ensure
compliance with regulations, bye-laws and other requirements.

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 312
DRAUGHTSPERSONS AND BUILDING INSPECTORS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3121 ARCHITECTURAL TECHNOLOGISTS AND TOWN PLANNING
TECHNICIANS
3122 DRAUGHTSPERSONS
3123 BUILDING INSPECTORS

1

• issues development permits as authorised;

2

3121 ARCHITECTURAL
TECHNOLOGISTS AND TOWN
PLANNING TECHNICIANS
Architectural technologists and town planning
technicians perform a variety of technical support
functions to assist architects and planners with the
design of buildings and the layout of urban and rural
areas.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants possess a variety of qualifications including
GCSEs/S grades, a BTEC/SQA award, an Advanced
GNVQ/GSVQ Level III or a degree. Professional
qualifications are available and membership to
professional institutions may be required for some
posts.

TASKS

• investigates proposed design with regard to
practicality, cost and use;

• prepares building plans, drawings and
specifications for use by contractors;

• checks that completed work conforms to
specifications.

3

RELATED JOB TITLES
Architectural assistant
Architectural technician
Architectural technologist
Planning assistant (local government)
Planning enforcement officer

4

3122 DRAUGHTSPERSONS

5

Draughtspersons prepare technical drawings, plans,
maps, charts and similar items.

6

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, BTEC/
SQA awards, an appropriate GNVQ/GSVQ or A
levels/H grades. Further training consists of courses
of study and supervised practical experience.

7

• liaises with engineers and building contractors
regarding technical construction problems and
attends site meetings on behalf of architect;

• surveys land and property uses and prepares
report for planning authority;

TASKS

• examines design specification to determine

8

general requirements;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

107

Major Group 3

• considers the suitability of different materials

• visits building sites, examines foundations and

with regard to the dimensions and weight and
calculates the likely fatigue, stresses, tolerances,
bonds and threads;

inspects drains to ensure compliance with
regulations;

• prepares design drawings, plans or sketches and
checks feasibility of construction and compliance
with safety regulations;

• inspects structural condition of buildings for
insurance and mortgage purposes;

• prepares reports and recommendations on all
inspections made.

• prepares detailed drawings, plans, charts or maps

1

that include natural features, desired surface
finish, elevations, electrical circuitry and other
details as required;

• arranges for completed drawings to be
reproduced for use as working drawings.

2

3

RELATED JOB TITLES
Cartographer
Designer-detailer
Designer-draughtsman
Draughtsman/woman
Draughtsman-engineer
Engineering draughtsman

3123 BUILDING INSPECTORS

4

Building inspectors inspect building plans and
structures to ensure compliance with building
regulations, bye-laws and any other statutory
requirements.

5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications although employers increasingly
require candidates to possess a degree. Professional
qualifications and membership to professional
bodies are available and may be required in some
posts.

7
TASKS

• examines building plans to ensure compliance
with local, statutory and other requirements;

8

• inspects building structure, sanitation, lighting,
ventilation and fire precautions to determine
suitability for habitation;

9
108

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Building control officer
Building inspector
Inspector (NHBRC)

Workers in this minor group are responsible for the day-to-day running of computer systems
and networks, and provide technical support, advice and guidance for IT users and customers.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 313
IT SERVICE DELIVERY OCCUPATIONS

3131 IT OPERATIONS TECHNICIANS
3132 IT USER SUPPORT TECHNICIANS

1
3131 IT OPERATIONS
TECHNICIANS
IT operations technicians are responsible for the dayto-day running of computer systems and networks
including the preparation of back-up systems, and
for performing regular checks to ensure the smooth
functioning of such systems.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience. Entrants
typically possess GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H
grades, BTEC/SQA awards, an Advanced GNVQ/
GSVQ Level III or a degree. Training is usually
provided on-the-job supplemented by specialised
courses.
Postgraduate and professional
qualifications, and a variety of NVQs/SVQs at
Levels 2, 3 and 4 are available.

TASKS

• acts as a liaison between users, outside suppliers,
engineers and other technical groups;

• develops and maintains site administration
documentation and configuration records.

RELATED JOB TITLES

3

Computer operator
Database manager
IT technician
Network technician
Systems administrator
Web master

4

3132 IT USER SUPPORT
TECHNICIANS
IT user support technicians are responsible for
providing technical support, advice and guidance for
customers or IT users within an organisation, either
directly or by telephone, e-mail or other network
interaction.

• analyses

performance
and
makes
recommendations to enhance reliability, usability,
security and other aspects of system
performance;

• provides guidance to users on hardware, software
and network operations;

• identifies problems, agrees remedial action and
undertakes emergency network maintenance if
required;

5

6

• installs, monitors and supports area networks and
accompanying hardware and software;

2

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience. Entrants
typically possess GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H
grades, BTEC/SQA awards, an Advanced GNVQ/
GSVQ Level III or a degree. Training is usually
provided on-the-job supplemented by specialised
courses. Postgraduate and professional qualifications,
and NVQs/SVQs in Support Users of Information
Technology at Levels 2 and 3 are available.

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

109

Major Group 3

TASKS

• addresses IT queries and problems from
customers or IT users within an organisation;

• discusses problem with IT user and asks
questions in order to determine the likely cause;

• advises users remotely on the sequence of actions
that are likely to remedy the problem;

• arranges for support staff or field engineers to

1

visit the user, or arrange for the return of
equipment for inspection where problems cannot
be solved remotely;

• maintains records of the queries received, the
action taken to remedy the problem and the final
outcome.

2
RELATED JOB TITLES

3

Help desk operator
Helpline operator (computing)
IT helpline support officer
Support technician (computing)
Systems support officer

4

5

6

7

8

9
110

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Health and social welfare associate professionals provide a variety of technical support
functions for health professionals in the treatment of patients, apply physical, therapeutic
and other treatments or activities to assist in physical and psychological recovery, and
provide social welfare and related community services.

1

MINOR GROUP 321
HEALTH ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
Workers in this minor group assist doctors in their tasks, provide nursing care for the sick
and injured, provide prenatal and postnatal care for mothers and babies, administer first
aid treatment in emergencies, operate x-ray and other imaging equipment, fit hearing aids
and spectacles, treat foot, eye, speech and movement disorders, provide a variety of technical
support functions for health professionals.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3211
3212
3213
3214
3215
3216
3217
3218

Nurses provide general and/or specialised nursing
care for the sick, injured and others in need of such
care, assist medical doctors with their tasks, and
advise and teach on nursing practice.

4

5

registration training is available for a range of clinical
specialisms.

Both non-graduate, graduate and postgraduate entry
is possible. Training lasts up to four years depending
upon the method of study. There is a lower age limit
of 16 years 6 months to enter training. Post-

6

TASKS

• assists medical doctors, deals with emergencies
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

2

3

NURSES
MIDWIVES
PARAMEDICS
MEDICAL RADIOGRAPHERS
CHIROPODISTS
DISPENSING OPTICIANS
PHARMACEUTICAL DISPENSERS
MEDICAL AND DENTAL TECHNICIANS

3211 NURSES

Major Group 3

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 32
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS

and prepares patients for examination;

7

• monitors patient's progress, administers drugs
and medicines, applies surgical dressings and
gives other forms of treatment;

• participates in the preparation for physical and

8

psychological treatment of mentally ill patients;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

111

Major Group 3

• plans duty rotas and organises and directs the
work and training of ward and theatre nursing
staff;

• advises on nursing care, disease prevention,
nutrition, etc. and liaises with hospital board/
management on issues concerning nursing policy.

RELATED JOB TITLES

1

Health visitor
Nurse
Staff nurse
State enrolled nurse
State registered nurse
Ward sister

2
3212 MIDWIVES

3

Midwives deliver, or assist in the delivery of babies,
provide antenatal and postnatal care and advise
parents on baby care.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Midwife
Midwifery sister

3213 PARAMEDICS
Paramedics provide advanced first aid and life
support treatment in emergency situations and
transport sick and injured people who require skilled
treatment.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Paramedics must have completed at least 12 months
experience as an ambulance technician (see Unit
Group 6112: Ambulance staff (excluding
paramedics)) before selection for paramedic training.
Selection involves written and practical
examinations in ambulance care and an interview.
Entrants must then complete 8 weeks of assessed
training to gain a Certificate for Ambulance
Paramedic Skills.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

4

5

6

Entry is most common as a Registered General Nurse
(RGN) to shortened pre-registration training lasting
18 months. For non-registered nurses, entry to the
three year pre-registration training programme
requires GCSEs/S grades or an approved educational
equivalent. Some institutions allow candidates who
do not possess the minimum entry requirements to
take an educational test. There is a lower age limit
of 17 years to enter training.

TASKS

• drives ambulance or accompanies driver to
respond to calls for assistance at accidents,
emergencies and other incidents;

• ascertains nature of injuries, provides first aid
treatment and assesses appropriate method of
conveying patients;

• completes patient report forms describing
patients condition and any treatment undertaken
for the use of medical staff;

TASKS

• transports and accompanies patients who either
• monitors condition and progress of patient during
pregnancy;

7

require or potentially require skilled treatment
whilst travelling.

• delivers babies in normal births and assists
doctors with difficult deliveries;

RELATED JOB TITLES

• monitors recovery of mother in postnatal period
and supervises the nursing of premature and other
babies requiring special attention;

8

• advises on baby care, exercise, diet and family
planning issues.

9
112

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Ambulance paramedic
Paramedic

Medical radiographers operate x-ray machines,
ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging and other
imaging devices for diagnostic and therapeutic
purposes under the direction of a radiologist or other
medical practitioner.

podiatric medicine. Courses combine theoretical and
practical training. There is a lower age limit for entry
of 18 years.

TASKS

Major Group 3

3214 MEDICAL RADIOGRAPHERS

• examines patient's feet to determine the nature
and extent of disorder;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades and A
levels/H grades followed by three years training for
a recognised degree in radiography. Minimum age
on entry to training is 17 years. Post-qualifying
courses are available for specialist areas.

• treats conditions of the skin, nails and soft tissues
of feet by minor surgery, massage and heat
treatment, padding and strapping or drugs;

• prescribes, makes and fits pads and other
appliances to correct and/or protect foot
disorders;

• advises patient on aspects of foot care to avoid
recurrence of foot problems;
TASKS

• verifies identity of patient and ensures that

strength of dosage of isotope;

• positions patient and operates x-ray, scanning or

surgical attention.

3

RELATED JOB TITLES
Chiropodist
Chiropodist-podiatrist

4

fluoroscopic equipment;

• maintains records of all radiographic/therapeutic
work undertaken.

3216 DISPENSING OPTICIANS
Dispensing opticians supply and fit spectacles and
other optical aids according to prescription.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Diagnostic radiographer (medical services)
Medical radiographer
X-ray operator

3215 CHIROPODISTS
Chiropodists diagnose and treat ailments and
abnormalities of the human foot.

2

• refers patients who require further medical or

necessary preparations have been made for the
examination/treatment;

• decides length and intensity of exposure or

1

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades, a
BTEC/SQA award, an Intermediate GNVQ/GSVQ
Level II or A levels/H grades followed by up to three
years training and the successful completion of
professional examinations.

6

7
TASKS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• interprets prescription and measures patient's

Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades and A
levels/H grades followed by three years training for
a recognised degree in chiropody, podiatry or

• advises patient on lens type and choice of

face to determine distance between pupil centres,
height of bridge of nose, etc.;

8

spectacle frames;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

113

Major Group 3

• prepares detailed instructions for workshop;
• ensures that completed spectacles conform to
specification and fit the patient correctly and
comfortably;

• fits spectacles and advises patient on lens care and
any other difficulties likely to be experienced.

RELATED JOB TITLES

1

Dispensing optician

3217 PHARMACEUTICAL
DISPENSERS

2

3

4

Pharmaceutical dispensers assist pharmacists in
dispensing drugs and medicines, and issue prepackaged prescriptions.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades. Training
is typically received on-the-job, supplemented by
study towards vocational qualifications. NVQs/
SVQs in Pharmacy Services are available at Level 3.

• checks received prescriptions for legality and
accuracy;

• prepares drugs and medicines under the
supervision of pharmacist;

6

Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, BTEC/
SQA awards, an Intermediate GNVQ/GSVQ Level
II or A levels/H grades. Training may last up to five
years depending upon the field and method of study.
Professional qualifications and NVQs/SVQs at Level
3 are available in some areas.

TASKS

• operates equipment to diagnose and record or
treat hearing, heart, brain, lung and kidney
ailments;

• undertakes scaling and polishing of teeth, applies
medicaments, carries out post-operative hygiene
work and advises on preventative dentistry;

• makes dentures, crowns, bridges, orthodontic and

• measures patient's for, and fits them with, surgical
appliances, hearing aids and artificial limbs;

• performs related medical tasks including treating
hair and scalp disorders and conducting tests on
glaucoma patients.

drugs issued;
prescribed or medication purchased;

• checks stock levels, orders new stock from
pharmaceutical companies and ensures that drugs
are stored appropriately.

RELATED JOB TITLES

8

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• maintains records of prescriptions received and
• advises patients or customers on the use of drugs

7

Workers in this unit group operate cardiographic and
encephalographic testing equipment, give simple
dental treatment, fit artificial limbs and hearing aids,
and undertake related medical and dental tasks.

other dental appliances according to individual
patient requirements;

TASKS

5

3218 MEDICAL AND DENTAL
TECHNICIANS

Dispenser
Dispensing assistant
Pharmacy technician

9
114

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Audiologist
Cardiographer
Dental hygienist
Dental technician
Medical technical officer

Workers in this minor group plan and apply physical, therapeutic and other treatments or
activities to assist in the physical and psychological recovery from illness and injury, and
to minimise the effects of disabilities.

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 322
THERAPISTS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3221
3222
3223
3229

PHYSIOTHERAPISTS
OCCUPATIONAL THERAPISTS
SPEECH AND LANGUAGE THERAPISTS
THERAPISTS NEC

3221 PHYSIOTHERAPISTS

RELATED JOB TITLES

Physiotherapists plan and apply massage, exercise,
hydrotherapy and electrotherapy in the treatment of
injuries, diseases or disabilities.

Chartered physiotherapist
Physiotherapist
Superintendent physiotherapist

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

3222 OCCUPATIONAL
THERAPISTS

Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades and A
levels/H grades followed by up to four years training
on an approved degree scheme necessary for state
registration as a physiotherapist. To enter training
there is a lower age limit of 17 years and candidates
must pass a medical examination.

TASKS

• examines medical reports and assesses patient
to determine the condition of muscles, nerves or
joints in need of treatment;

• plans and undertakes therapy to improve

1

2

3

Occupational therapists work with people who have
a physical or mental disability or mental illness in
order to maximise self-confidence and independent
functioning.

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess A levels/H grades, an
Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, a BTEC/SQA
award or equivalent qualifications followed by
training on an approved degree scheme necessary
for state registration as an occupational therapist.
There is a lower age limit of 18 years to enter
training.

circulation, restore joint mobility, strengthen
muscles and reduce pain;

• explains treatment to and instructs patient in

4

6

7
TASKS

posture and other exercises and adapts treatment
as necessary;

• considers the physical, psychological and social

• monitors patient's progress and liaises with others

• designs, initiates and monitors carefully selected

concerned with the treatment and rehabilitation
of patient.

and graded activities as part of the assessment
and intervention process;

needs of a patient;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

115

Major Group 3

• makes home visits to clients, families and carers
• counsels clients in ways to promote a healthy

3229 THERAPISTS NEC
Occupational therapist

1
3223 SPEECH AND LANGUAGE
THERAPISTS
Speech and language therapists are responsible for
the assessment, diagnosis and treatment of speech,
language, fluency and voice disorders caused by
disability, injury or illness.

3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

4

Entrants require a recognised graduate or
postgraduate degree that encompasses both theory
and clinical practice. Successful completion of these
courses leads to eligibility for a certificate to practice
and membership of the Royal College of Speech and
Language Therapists. Full membership is granted
after completion of a year of supervised post
qualifying experience.

5
TASKS

• assesses and diagnoses a clients condition;

6

• designs and initiates an appropriate remedial
programme of treatment;

• treats speech and language disorders by coaching
clients or through the use of artificial
communication devices;

7

• attends case conferences and liaises with other
specialists such as doctors, teachers, social
workers and psychologists;

• counsels relatives to help cope with the problems

8

Speech and language therapist
Speech therapist

lifestyle, prevention of illness and/or preparation
for coping with increasing stages of illness.

RELATED JOB TITLES

2

RELATED JOB TITLES

to assist them to deal and cope with disability;

created by a patients disability;

• writes reports and maintains client caseloads.

9
116

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this unit group plan and apply physical
and therapeutic treatments and activities to assist
recovery from illness and to minimise the effects of
disabilities not elsewhere classified in MINOR
GROUP 322: Therapists.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess an accredited degree or
postgraduate qualification. Training can take
between two to five years depending upon the chosen
method of study. Courses provide a mixture of
theoretical study and practical experience.
Membership of professional bodies may be
mandatory in some areas.

TASKS

• prescribes diet therapy and gives advice to
patients, health care professionals and the
public on dietetic and nutritional matters for
those with special dietary requirements or to
prevent illness amongst the general
population;

• diagnoses and treats disorders of vision and eye
movements, monitors subsequent progress and
recommends further optical, pharmacological or
surgical treatment as required;

• manipulates and massages patient to discover the
cause of pain, relieve discomfort, restore function
and mobility and to correct irregularities in body
structure;

• inserts needles under the skin, administers
aromatic herbs and oils and massages body to
relieve pain and restore health;

• assesses and provides treatment for people with
mental disabilities, or those suffering with mental
illness.

Major Group 3

RELATED JOB TITLES
Acupuncturist
Dietician
Masseur
Orthoptist
Osteopath
Psychotherapist

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

117

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 323
SOCIAL WELFARE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
Social welfare associate professionals direct, organise and provide social welfare and related
community services, assess and address the housing needs of individuals or localities,
assist those with physical and mental disabilities or illnesses, investigate cases of abuse or
neglect and perform other welfare functions.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3231 YOUTH AND COMMUNITY WORKERS
3232 HOUSING AND WELFARE OFFICERS

1

2

3231 YOUTH AND COMMUNITY
WORKERS

3

Youth and community workers provide support to
individuals or groups of individuals through a range
of activities or services that aim to encourage
participation in social, political and community
activities.

4

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Most qualified youth workers possess an accredited
diploma in higher education or postgraduate diploma
in youth and community work. A majority of
qualifying courses are for people aged over 21.

TASKS

6

• organises social, recreational and educational
activities in youth groups and local community
centres;

• undertakes the day-to-day running of community

7

centres and supervises the activities of part-time
and voluntary workers;

• liaises and supports voluntary workers running
groups in village halls, churches, mosques and
other places of worship;

• advises individuals with particular needs or

8

problems through informal discussion, individual
counselling or formal group discussion;

9
118

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

• works with tenants to improve facilities on
housing estates, helps set up credit unions,
encourages parents to establish playgroups,
works with other groups to find solutions to
shared concerns or problems.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Community worker
Day centre officer
Youth leader
Youth worker

3232 HOUSING AND WELFARE
OFFICERS
Housing and welfare officers assess and address
housing needs of particular localities and individuals,
assist the blind, deaf, sick, elderly, physically
handicapped and mentally ill with problems relating
to their condition, investigate cases of child neglect
or ill treatment and perform other welfare tasks not
elsewhere classified.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or relevant work experience.
NVQs/SVQs in Housing are available at Levels 2, 3
and 4. Professional qualifications are available and
may be required for some posts.

Major Group 3

TASKS

• oversee the day-to-day running of rented
properties including arranging for the signing of
leases, rent collection, maintenance work,
interviewing prospective tenants and allocating
properties to waiting list applicants;

• ensures that special needs accommodation is
suited to the needs of particular groups such as
the elderly and disabled, and that statutory
requirements for providing accommodation are
met;

1

• investigates allegations of child neglect or abuse,
liaises with other social workers, probation
officers and the police and, where necessary,
recommends legal action;

2

• helps the handicapped and sick to adjust to the
limitations imposed by their condition and
arranges for any necessary alterations in the
home;

• performs other welfare tasks not elsewhere

3

classified including working in a Citizens Advice
Bureau, developing community participation in
planning issues and organising local authority
home help services.

4

RELATED JOB TITLES
Advice worker
Care officer
Counsellor (welfare services)
Education welfare officer
Housing officer
Welfare officer

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

119

Major Group 3

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 33
PROTECTIVE SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
Workers in protective service occupations serve in the armed forces, the police force, fire
service, prison service and perform other protective service roles.

MINOR GROUP 331
PROTECTIVE SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

1

Workers in this minor group serve in Her Majesty's, foreign and Commonwealth armed
forces, investigate crimes and maintain law and order, fight fires and advise on fire
prevention, guard inmates and maintain discipline at prisons and detention centres, and
perform other miscellaneous protective service roles.

2

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3311 NCOs AND OTHER RANKS
3312 POLICE OFFICERS (SERGEANT AND BELOW)
3313 FIRE SERVICE OFFICERS (LEADING FIRE OFFICER AND
BELOW)
3314 PRISON SERVICE OFFICERS (BELOW PRINCIPAL OFFICER)
3319 PROTECTIVE SERVICE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS NEC

3

4
3311 NCOs AND OTHER RANKS

• stands watch and guards military establishments
and other buildings;

5

Workers in this unit group are full-time members of
the armed forces of the UK, the Commonwealth and
other foreign countries and perform duties for which
there is no civilian equivalent.

• trains and exercises using various military
equipment and tactics;

• patrols areas of possible military activity;
• leads and trains new recruits and lower ranks.

6

7

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
For a majority of positions entry does not depend
upon academic qualifications. Entrants generally
have to pass a selection interview, physical and
medical examination. Entry to certain trades requires
GCSEs/S grades or equivalent qualifications.

TASKS

8

• monitors, operates, services and repairs military
equipment;

9
120

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Airman/woman
Corporal
Petty officer
Private
Sapper
Sergeant
Sergeant-Major

Police officers (Sergeant and below) co-ordinate and
undertake the investigation of crimes, patrol public
areas, arrest offenders and suspects and enforce law
and order.

3313 FIRE SERVICE OFFICERS
(LEADING FIRE OFFICER
AND BELOW)
Workers in this unit group co-ordinate and participate
in fire fighting activities, advise on fire prevention
and salvage goods during and after fires.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no academic requirements for entry to the
civilian (Home Office) police although graduates
may apply for accelerated promotion. Entrants must
sit an entry test and pass a medical examination. All
police officers undergo a two year probationary
training period.

There are no formal academic requirements although
some brigades may specify certain GCSEs/S grades.
Good colour vision without spectacles or contact
lenses is required. Candidates must also pass a
medical examination and a strength test. Initial
training lasts between 3 and 4 months and is followed
by a two year probationary period of assessment.

Major Group 3

3312 POLICE OFFICERS
(SERGEANT AND BELOW)

1

2

TASKS
TASKS

• receives instructions from senior officers and
patrols an assigned area on foot, horseback,
motorcycle, motor car or boat to check security
and enforce regulations;

• inspects premises to identify potential fire

• directs and controls traffic or crowds and

• arranges fire drills and tests alarm systems and

demonstrations;

• investigates complaints, crimes, accidents, any
suspicious activities or other incidents;

hazards and to check that statutory fire fighting
equipment is available and in working order;
equipment;

4

• travels to fire or other emergency by vehicle and
locates water mains if necessary;

• interviews suspects, takes statements from

• operates hose pipes, ladders, chemical, foam, gas

witnesses and stops, searches and/or arrests
suspects;

• rescues people or animals trapped by fire and

• prepares briefs or reports for senior officers;
• gives evidence in court cases.

3

or powder fire extinguishing appliances;

5

administers first aid;

• removes goods from fire damaged premises,
clears excess water, makes safe any structural
hazards and takes any other necessary steps to
reduce damage to property.

6

RELATED JOB TITLES
Detective sergeant
Police constable
Police officer
Policeman

RELATED JOB TITLES

7

Fire officer (coal mine)
Fire fighter (fire service)
Fireman (fire service)

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

121

Major Group 3

3314 PRISON SERVICE OFFICERS
(BELOW PRINCIPAL OFFICER)
Prison service officers (below Principal Officer)
direct, co-ordinate and participate in guarding
inmates and maintaining discipline in prisons and
other detention centres.

national borders, monitor maritime conditions,
undertake search and rescue operations and perform
other security and protective service occupations not
elsewhere classified in MINOR GROUP 331:
Protective Service Occupations.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1

2

Entrants require GCSEs/S grades or equivalent
qualifications. Candidates must be between 20 and
49 years old in England and Wales or between 20
and 57 years old in Scotland. Candidates must pass
a pre-entry test and full medical examination. Basic
training lasts for a period of 11 weeks and is followed
by a 12 month probationary period.

These posts have varying entry requirements. Some
posts require no academic qualifications whereas
others require GCSEs/S grades and/or relevant
practical experience. Entry to some occupations is
followed by periods of assessed probationary
training and professional examinations.

TASKS

• examines, weighs and counts goods imported by
TASKS

3

4

• escorts prisoners to and from cells and supervises
them during meals, recreation and visiting periods;

• examines passports, visas, work permits and

• watches for any infringements of regulations and

other immigration documents, and allows or
refuses entry into the UK;

searches prisoners and cells for weapons, drugs
and other contraband items;

• maintains revenue control at breweries, tobacco

• guards entrances and perimeter walls;
• investigates disturbances or any other unusual
occurrences;

5

• escorts prisoners transferred from one institution
to another;
•

6

7

8

ship or aircraft, ensures that the declared value
of goods is satisfactory and that duties and taxes
have been paid;

reports on prisoners' conduct as necessary.

factories and other premises where dutiable
goods are manufactured, processed or stored;

• visits racecourses, greyhound stadiums and
betting shops to ensure compliance with legal
requirements;

• broadcasts information on weather and maritime
conditions, monitors shipping and provides
instruction to navigators;

• receives distress messages, alerts other
RELATED JOB TITLES

appropriate rescue services and participates in
search and rescue operations;

Prison officer
Warder (prison service)

• photographs, fingerprints and undertakes other

3319 PROTECTIVE SERVICE
ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
NEC

RELATED JOB TITLES

Workers in this unit group inspect goods to ensure
compliance with regulations concerning payment of
duty, establish that persons entering and leaving the
UK have necessary authorisation for crossing

9
122

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

forms of forensic examination at the scene of a
crime.

Coastguard
Coastguard officer
Customs and Excise officer
Emergency planning officer
Scenes of crime officer (civilian)

Workers in this sub-major group create and restore artistic works; write, edit and evaluate
literary material; perform in acts of entertainment; arrange and perform musical
compositions; produce television, film and stage presentations; present television and radio
broadcasts; operate camera, sound and lighting equipment; promote the image of
organisations, goods and services; design commercial and industrial products; compete in
sporting events for financial gain; and provide training and instruction for sporting and
recreational activities.

Major Group 3

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 34
CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORTS OCCUPATIONS

1

MINOR GROUP 341
ARTISTIC AND LITERARY OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group create and restore artistic work, write, evaluate and edit literary
material, translate written and spoken statements, perform in films, theatre and other acts
of entertainment, write, arrange and perform musical compositions, and produce television
programmes, films and stage presentations.

2

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

3

3411
3412
3413
3414
3415
3416

ARTISTS
AUTHORS, WRITERS
ACTORS, ENTERTAINERS
DANCERS AND CHOREOGRAPHERS
MUSICIANS
ARTS OFFICERS, PRODUCERS AND DIRECTORS

4

5
3411 ARTISTS

TASKS

Workers in this unit group create artistic works by
painting, drawing, printing, sculpting and engraving,
design artwork and illustrations, and restore damaged
pieces of art.

• conceives and develops ideas for artistic
composition;

6

• selects appropriate materials, medium and method;
• prepares sketches, scale drawings or colour
schemes;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• builds up composition into finished work by

No specific academic qualifications are required
although a variety of GNVQs/GSVQs, BTEC/SQA
awards and degrees are available.

• approaches managers of galleries and exhibitions

7

carving, sculpting, etching, painting, engraving
and drawing;
in order to get finished work displayed.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

123

Major Group 3

RELATED JOB TITLES
Animator (cartoon films)
Artist
Illustrator
Picture restorer
Sculptor

Editor
Freelance writer
Interpreter
Script writer
Translator

3413 ACTORS, ENTERTAINERS
3412 AUTHORS, WRITERS

1

2

3

Workers in this unit group write, edit and evaluate
literary material for publication (excluding material
for newspapers, magazines and other periodicals)
and translate spoken and written statements into
different languages.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience.
Postgraduate and professional qualifications are
available and are required for some occupations.

Actors and entertainers sing, portray roles in
dramatic productions, perform comedy routines,
gymnastic feats and tricks of illusion, train animals
to perform and perform with them.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry does not depend on academic qualifications
although some drama schools require candidates to
have GCSEs/S grades or A levels/H grades. Entry
to drama schools is usually based upon an audition.
Some colleges prefer students to be under 25 years
of age. Membership of the appropriate Trades Union
is usually required. GNVQs/GSVQs and BTEC/
SQA awards in Performing Arts are available.

TASKS

4

5

TASKS

• determines subject matter and researches as
necessary by interviewing, attending public
events, seeking out records, etc.;

• studies script, play or book and prepares and

• selects material for publication, checks style,

• assumes character created by a playwright or

grammar and accuracy of content, arranges for
any necessary revisions and checks proof copies
before printing;

rehearses interpretation;
author and communicates this to an audience;

• performs singing, comedy, illusion and conjuring
routines;

• negotiates contracts with freelance agents and
with buyer on behalf of writer;

6

and may perform with them;

• writes instruction manuals and user guides,
technical reports, catalogues and indexes,
prepares sales literature and writes technical
articles for trade journals;

7

8

• trains animals to perform entertaining routines

• converts documents or spoken statements from
original or source language into another
language.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Author
Author (technical)

9
124

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

• plays pre-recorded music at nightclubs,
discotheques, and private functions.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Actor
Disc jockey
Entertainer
Singer (entertainment)

Dancers and choreographers devise, direct, rehearse
and perform classical and contemporary dance
routines.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Entry to a degree or graduate diploma course requires
A levels/H grades. Entrants to the performers'
diploma course generally possess GCSEs/S grades
and Associated Board examination passes in their
chosen instrument(s) and will be required to audition
for places.

Major Group 3

3414 DANCERS AND
CHOREOGRAPHERS

TASKS

• conceives and writes original music;
There are no formal academic requirements,
although some dance schools may require candidates
to have passed relevant dance exams. Entry to most
courses is via audition. Some dance schools may state
minimum and maximum height requirements.
Performers' courses typically last three years and lead
to a diploma or certificate awarded by the school.
Some degree courses are also available.

• tunes instrument and studies and rehearses score;

1

• plays instrument as a soloist or as a member of a
group or orchestra;

• scores music for different combinations of
voices and instruments to produce desired
effect;

2

• auditions and selects performers and rehearses
TASKS

and conducts them in the performance of the
composition.

• builds and maintains stamina, physical strength,
agility and general health through fitness
exercises and healthy eating;

• attends rehearsals to develop and practice dance
routines for performance;

• demonstrates and directs dance moves, monitors
and analyses technique and performance, and
determines how improvements can be made.

3
RELATED JOB TITLES
Cellist
Composer (music)
Musician
Organist
Pianist
Violinist

4

5

RELATED JOB TITLES
Ballet dancer
Ballet teacher
Choreographer
Dance instructor
Dancer

3415 MUSICIANS
Musicians write, arrange, orchestrate, conduct and
perform musical compositions.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements
although many possess degrees or diploma courses.

3416 ARTS OFFICERS,
PRODUCERS AND
DIRECTORS
Arts officers, producers and directors assume
creative, financial and organisational responsibilities
in the production of television programmes, films,
stage presentations and the promotion and exhibition
of other cultural activities.

6

7
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry does not depend on academic qualifications although
many entrants possess BTEC/SQA awards, diplomas or
degrees in theatre, drama, stage management or media
related courses. Training is received on-the-job,
supplemented by specialist courses.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

125

Major Group 3

TASKS

• chooses writers, scripts, technical staff and
performers, and assumes overall responsibility
for completion of project on time and within
budget;

• directs actors, designers, camera team, sound
crew and other technical staff to achieve desired
effects;

• breaks script into scenes and formulates a

1

shooting schedule that will be most economical
in terms of time, location and sets;

• prepares rehearsal and production schedule for
main events, design of sets and costumes,
technical rehearsals and dress rehearsals;

2

• ensures necessary equipment, props, performers
and technical staff are on set when required;

• selects, contracts, markets and arranges for the

3

presentation of performance, visual and heritage
arts.

RELATED JOB TITLES

4

Arts development officer
Arts officer
Entertainment agent
Producer (entertainment)
Stage manager (entertainment)
Studio manager

5

6

7

8

9
126

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this minor group use visual, audio, multimedia and other techniques to convey
information for publicity, promotional and advertising purposes, design industrial and
commercial products, clothing and fashion accessories.

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 342
DESIGN ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3421 GRAPHIC DESIGNERS
3422 PRODUCT, CLOTHING AND RELATED DESIGNERS

3421 GRAPHIC DESIGNERS

RELATED JOB TITLES

Graphic designers using illustrative, sound, visual
and other multimedia techniques to convey a
message for information, advertising, promotion or
publicity purposes.

Commercial artist
Graphic artist
Graphic designer

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants have usually completed a foundation course,
an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, a BTEC/SQA
award, a degree and/or postgraduate qualification.
An NVQ/SVQ in Graphic Design is available at
Level 2.

1

2

3

3422 PRODUCT, CLOTHING AND
RELATED DESIGNERS
Product, clothing and related designers plan, direct
and undertake the creation of designs for new
industrial and commercial products, clothing and
related fashion accessories.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5

TASKS

• liaises with client to clarify aims of project brief,
discusses media to be used, establishes timetable
for project and defines budgetary constraints;

• undertakes research into project, considers
previous related projects and compares costs of
using different processes;

4

Entrants have usually completed a foundation course,
an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III, a BTEC/SQA
award, a degree and/or postgraduate qualification.
NVQs/SVQs in Fashion Design and Design are
available at Level 2.

6

TASKS

• prepares sketches, scale drawings, models,
colour schemes and other mock-ups to show
clients and discusses any required alterations;

• prepares instructions for printers, specifies
typefaces, size, alignments and other formatting
requirements.

• liaises with client to determine the purpose, cost,
technical specification and potential uses/users
of product;

7

• undertakes research to determine market
trends;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

127

Major Group 3

• prepares sketches, designs, patterns or prototypes
for textiles, clothing, footwear, jewellery, fashion
accessories, ceramics, plastics, motor vehicles,
domestic appliances and engineering products;

• submits design to management, sales department
and client for approval and makes any necessary
alterations;

• oversees production of sample product.

1

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Clothing designer
Commercial designer
Fashion designer
Furniture designer
Industrial designer
Interior designer
Textile designer

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
128

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

MEDIA ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
Workers in this minor group write, evaluate and edit literary material for newspapers and
periodicals, present, direct and produce television and radio broadcasts, promote the image
and understanding of organisations and operate camera, sound, video and lighting equipment.

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 343

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3431
3432
3433
3434

JOURNALISTS, NEWSPAPER AND PERIODICAL EDITORS
BROADCASTING ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICERS
PHOTOGRAPHERS AND AUDIO-VISUAL EQUIPMENT
OPERATORS

3431 JOURNALISTS, NEWSPAPER
AND PERIODICAL EDITORS
Journalists, newspaper and periodical editors write,
evaluate and edit literary material for publication in
newspapers, magazines and other periodicals.

1

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Journalist
News editor (newspaper)
Reporter (newspaper)
Sports writer
Sub-editor

3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements although
entrants usually possess a degree. A variety of
postgraduate diplomas are available. NVQs/SVQs
covering various aspects of journalism are available
at Levels 3 and 4.

TASKS

• determines subject matter and undertakes
research by interviewing, attending public events,
seeking out records, reviewing written work,
attending film and stage performances etc.;

• writes articles and features and submits draft
manuscripts to newspaper, magazine or
periodical editor;

• selects material for publication, checks style,
grammar, accuracy and legality of content and
arranges for any necessary revisions;

• liaises with production staff in checking final
proof copies immediately prior to printing.

4
3432 BROADCASTING ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS
Broadcasting associate professionals introduce,
present and participate in radio and television
programmes, research material for broadcasts, and
assume organisational and financial responsibility
for the production of television and radio
programmes.

5

6

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements although
entrants usually possess a degree and have
experience in journalism and/or broadcasting.
Training is usually on-the-job supplemented by
professionally recognised training courses. NVQs/
SVQs in Broadcast Journalism are available at Level
4.

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

129

Major Group 3

• writes, edits and arranges for the effective

TASKS

• introduces radio and television programmes,
reads news bulletins and makes announcements;

• conducts interviews and prepares reports for

• addresses individuals, clients and other target

news broadcasts, current affairs programmes and
documentaries;

groups through meetings, presentations, the
media and other events to enhance the public
image of an organisation;

• directs actors and briefs designers, camera

• develops and implements tools to monitor and

operators, sound recordists and editors on the
effect to be achieved;

1

distribution of press releases, news letters and
other public relations material;

evaluate the effectiveness of public relations
exercises.

• assumes financial and organisational
responsibility for the completion of television
programmes on time and within budget;

• edits film and videotape to assemble shots in the
required sequence.

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Information officer
Press officer
Public relations consultant
Publicity assistant

RELATED JOB TITLES

3

4

5

6

7

Broadcaster
News reporter (broadcasting)
Production assistant (broadcasting)
Radio journalist
Television producer
Video editor

3433 PUBLIC RELATIONS
OFFICERS

3434 PHOTOGRAPHERS AND
AUDIO-VISUAL EQUIPMENT
OPERATORS
Workers in this unit group operate and assist with
still, cine and television cameras and operate other
equipment to record and project sound and vision
for entertainment, commercial and industrial
purposes.

Public relations officers promote the image and
understanding of an organisation and its products or
services to consumers, businesses, members of the
public and other specified audiences.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no set academic requirements although
entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, A levels/
H grades and are able to demonstrate proof of preentry work experience. A variety of BTEC/SQA
awards, diplomas, degrees and postgraduate
qualifications are available. NVQs/SVQs in
Photography are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although entrants usually possess A levels/H grades
and a degree or equivalent qualification. Training
is typically received on-the-job and supplemented
by short courses or qualifications provided by
professional institutions.

TASKS

• selects subject and conceives composition of
picture or discusses composition with colleagues;
TASKS

8

• arranges subject, lighting, camera equipment and

• discusses issues of business strategy, products,
services and target client base with management
to identify public relations requirements;

9
130

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

any microphones;

• checks that camera is loaded, inserts lenses and
adjusts aperture and speed settings as necessary;

Major Group 3

• photographs subject or follows action by moving
camera;

• checks operation and positioning of projectors,
videotape machines, mobile microphones and
mixing and dubbing equipment;

• operates telecine, projection and video
equipment to record and play back films and
television programmes;

• operates sound mixing and dubbing equipment
to obtain desired mix, level and balance of sound.

1
RELATED JOB TITLES
Audio visual technician
Camera operator (film, television production)
Film technician
Photographer
Press photographer
Projectionist
Sound recordist

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

131

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 344
SPORTS AND FITNESS OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group prepare for and compete in sporting events for financial gain,
train amateur and professional sportsmen and women to enhance performance, promote
participation and standards in sport, organise and officiate sporting events, and provide
instruction, training and supervision for various forms of exercise and other recreational
activities.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

1

3441
3442
3443
3449

2

3

4

SPORTS PLAYERS
SPORTS COACHES, INSTRUCTORS AND OFFICIALS
FITNESS INSTRUCTORS
SPORTS AND FITNESS OCCUPATIONS NEC

3441 SPORTS PLAYERS

RELATED JOB TITLES

Professional sportsmen and women train and
compete, either individually or as part of a team, in
their chosen sport for financial gain.

Cricketer
Footballer
Golfer
Jockey

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required. Entry is
based upon talent that can be further developed
through coaching and training.

5
TASKS

3442 SPORTS COACHES,
INSTRUCTORS AND
OFFICIALS
Sports coaches, instructors and officials work with
amateur and professional sportsmen and women to
enhance performance, encourage greater
participation in sport, and organise and officiate
sporting events according to established rules.

• participates in exhibitions, pre-qualifying events,

6

tournaments and competitions;

• attends training sessions to develop skills and
practice individual or team moves and tactics;

• builds stamina, physical strength and agility

7

through running, fitness exercises and weight
training;

• maintains clothing and other specialised sporting
equipment;

8

• discusses performance problems with coaches,
physiotherapists, dieticians and doctors.

9
132

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements although
individuals must have experience in their sport and
the relevant coaching and refereeing qualifications.
Applicants to coaching courses must normally be
over 18 years old and hold a first aid certificate.
Some courses encompass coaching awards within
broader programmes of study such as BTEC/SQA
awards. NVQs/SVQs are available in the context
of certain sports.

TASKS

• coaches teams or individuals by demonstrating

• assesses the fitness levels of clients;

techniques and directing training and exercise
sessions;

• devises programmes of training appropriate to

• controls team selection and discipline and

the needs of clients with varying levels of
strength, fitness and ability;

recruits ancillary staff such as coaches or
physiotherapists;

• ensures that clients do not injure themselves

• monitors and analyses technique and
performance, and determines how future
improvements can be made;

• deals with administrative aspects such as
arranging matches, contests or appearances for
athlete or team, and organising required transport
and accommodation;

• provides information and develops facilities to
encourage greater participation in sport, and to
enhance the standards of participants;

• starts race, competition or match and controls
its progress according to established rules.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Referee
Sports coach
Sports development officer
Steward (horse racing)
Swimming teacher
Umpire

through over exertion or using incorrect training
techniques;

• plans and monitors personal fitness schedules;
• understands the health and safety aspects of

Fitness instructors deliver training in aerobics, keep
fit, weight training and other forms of exercise at
private health and fitness centres or local authority
run sports and leisure centres.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTE AND
ASSORTED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements.
Entrants however must possess coaching
qualifications recognised by the appropriate
governing body. Applicants to coaching courses
must normally be over 18 years old and hold a first
aid certificate.

1

different forms of exercise and ensures that any
statutory requirements are met.

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Aerobics instructor
Fitness consultant
Keep fit teacher

3
3449 SPORTS AND FITNESS
OCCUPATIONS NEC
Workers in this unit group instruct and supervise
clients in a variety of recreational activities such as
climbing, canoeing and mountaineering.

TYPICAL ENTRY REQUIREMENTS

3443 FITNESS INSTRUCTORS

Major Group 3

TASKS

There are no formal academic requirements.
Entrants must possess a variety of coaching
qualifications recognised by the appropriate
governing bodies and usually have considerable
practical experience. Applicants to coaching courses
must normally be 18 years old and hold a first aid
certificate.

4

5

6

TASKS

• devises programmes of activities to suit the needs

7

of clients with varying levels of strength, fitness
and ability;

• understands the health and safety aspects of
different forms of recreational activity and
ensures that any statutory requirements are met;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

133

Major Group 3

• inspects and maintains specialised clothing and
other sporting equipment;

• arranges transportation and accommodation for
participants.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Outdoor pursuits instructor
Outward bound tutor
Riding instructor

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
134

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Business and public service associate professionals command and control the movement
of air, sea and rail traffic; organise the administrative work of legal practices; perform
specialist financial tasks; purchase goods and materials; provide technical sales advice to
clients; undertake market research, recruitment, training and industrial relations activities;
arrange for the trading and leasing of property on behalf of clients; undertake the planning,
promotion and maintenance of areas of the environment; perform administrative functions
in government; and undertake statutory inspections of health and safety.

MINOR GROUP 351
TRANSPORT ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS

Major Group 3

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 35
BUSINESS AND PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS

1

2

Workers in this minor group command and navigate aircraft and vessels, drive trains, perform
technical functions to operate and maintain such craft, and plan and regulate the ground
and air movements of aircraft.

3

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3511
3512
3513
3514

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS
AIRCRAFT PILOTS AND FLIGHT ENGINEERS
SHIP AND HOVERCRAFT OFFICERS
TRAIN DRIVERS

3511 AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS
Air traffic controllers prepare flight plans, authorise
flight departures and arrivals and maintain radio,
radar and/or visual contact with aircraft to ensure
the safe movement of air traffic.

4

supervised practical experience leading to the
award of a Civil Aviation Authority licence.

TASKS

• maintains radio and/or radar or visual contact
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants must be aged between 18 and 27 at time
of application. Entrants require GCSEs/S grades
and A levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award or an
Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III. Academic
requirements may be lowered for those with
relevant aviation experience. Candidates must
have good eyesight and no hearing or speech
defects. Entrants are required to undergo a
medical examination. Training lasts 74 weeks and
consists of courses of study followed by

5

with aircraft and liaises with other air traffic
controllers and control centres to direct aircraft
in and out of controlled airspace and into holding
areas ready for landing;

• gives landing instructions to pilot and monitors
descent of aircraft;

6

7

• directs movement of aircraft and motor vehicles
on runways, taxiways and in parking bays;

• obtains information regarding weather
conditions, navigational hazards, landing
conditions, seating arrangements, loading of
cargo, fuel and catering supplies;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

135

Major Group 3

• calculates fuel consumption and optimum flying
height, plans route and prepares flight plan for
aircraft pilot;

• discusses operational requirements with pilot,
issues duty schedules for flight deck and cabin
crews, maintains records of flight progress and
authorises flight departure.

air traffic control and aircraft operating
procedures;

• monitors fuel consumption, air pressure, engine
performance and other indicators during flight
and advises pilot of any factors that affect the
navigation or performance of the aircraft;

• maintains radio contact and discusses weather
conditions with air traffic controllers;

RELATED JOB TITLES

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Air traffic controller
Controller of aircraft
Flight planner
Ground movement controller (airport)

3512 AIRCRAFT PILOTS AND
FLIGHT ENGINEERS
Aircraft flight deck officers check, regulate, adjust
and test engines and other equipment prior to takeoff, navigate and pilot aircraft and give flying lessons.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants with GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H grades,
an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level III or a BTEC/
SQA award can apply for an airline sponsorship.
Private residential training is available to candidates
with GCSEs/S grades or appropriate BTEC/SQA or
GNVQ/GSVQ awards or to holders of Private Pilots
Licences who have 700 hours flying experience.
Normal colour vision is required and candidates
undergo a medical examination. Training lasts up
to 15 months and consists of courses of study and
flying instruction. Airlines may have additional age
and height requirements.

TASKS

• studies flight plan, discusses it with flight deck

• performs specified tests to determine aircraft's
stability, response to controls and overall
performance;

• accompanies pupil on training flights and
demonstrates flying techniques.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Airline captain
Airline pilot
Commercial pilot
Flight engineer
Flying instructor
Pilot

3513 SHIP AND HOVERCRAFT
OFFICERS
Ship and hovercraft officers command and navigate
ships and other craft, co-ordinate the activities of
officers and deck and engine room ratings, operate
and maintain communications equipment on board
ship and undertake minor repairs to engines, boilers
and other mechanical and electrical equipment.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades and A
levels/H grades. Good colour vision without
spectacles or contact lenses is required for some
posts and candidates must undergo a medical
examination. Training lasts three to four years and
combines taught courses and assessed training at sea.

crew and makes any necessary adjustments;

• directs or undertakes routine checks on engines,

8

instruments, control panels, cargo distribution
and fuel supplies;

• directs or undertakes the operation of controls
to fly aeroplanes and helicopters, complying with

9
136

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

TASKS

• allocates duties to ship's officers and co-ordinates
and directs the activities of deck and engine room
ratings;

to inflate air cushions, run engines and propel
and steer ships, hovercraft and other vessels;

• locates the position of vessel using electronic and
other navigational aids such as charts and
compasses and advises on navigation where
appropriate;

• monitors the operation of engines, generators and
other mechanical and electrical equipment and
undertakes any necessary minor repairs;

• starts train when directed and operates controls
to regulate speed;

• watches for track hazards, observes signals and
temperature, pressure and other gauges;

• stops as directed to allow passengers to embark/
disembark, the loading and unloading of freight
and coupling/uncoupling of carriages and tubs;

• checks safety equipment, regulates the heating
of passenger compartments and records engine
defects or unusual incidents on the journey.

1

• maintains radio contact with other vessels and
coast stations;

• prepares watch keeping rota and maintains a
look-out for other vessels or obstacles;

• maintains log of vessel's progress, weather
conditions, conduct of crew, etc.

Major Group 3

• directs or undertakes the operation of controls

RELATED JOB TITLES
Engine driver (railways)
Locomotive driver
Train driver

2

RELATED JOB TITLES

3

Chief engineer (hovercraft)
Master mariner
Navigator (shipping)
Ship's captain (merchant navy)
Ship's officer (merchant navy)

4
3514 TRAIN DRIVERS
Train drivers drive diesel, diesel-electric, electric and
steam locomotives that transport passengers and
goods on surface and underground railways.

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

There are no formal academic requirements.
Entrants must pass a medical examination. Good
hearing, good eyesight and normal colour vision are
required. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.
An NVQ/SVQ in Rail Transport (Driving) is
available at Level 2.

7

TASKS

8

• checks controls, gauges, brakes and lights before
start of journey and studies route, timetable and
track information;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

137

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 352
LEGAL ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
Legal associate professionals organise the administrative work of legal practices and perform
specialised legal duties.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit group:
3520

1

2

3

4

5

LEGAL ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS

3520 LEGAL ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS
Workers in this unit group provide administrative
support for legal professionals, and investigate and
make recommendations on legal matters that do not
fall within the province of a normal court of law.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades and A
levels/H grades in appropriate subject areas. Offand on-the-job training is available. Membership
of professional institutions will be required for some
posts. Candidates must pass professional
examinations and complete up to five years of
practical experience.

TASKS

• runs chambers on behalf of principals, develops

6

the practice, manages the flow of work, decides
which cases to accept, arranges appropriate fees
and prepares financial records;

• collates information, drafts briefs and other
documents;

• interviews and advises clients, undertakes

7

preparatory work for court cases;

• attends court to assist barristers and solicitors in
the presentation of a case;

• assists in all aspects of property conveyancing
and probate and common law practice.

8

9
138

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Barrister's clerk
Conveyancer
Data protection officer
Legal assistant
Legal executive

Business and finance associate professionals calculate the probable costs of projects, assess
the value of properties, underwrite insurance policies and assess liability regarding claims,
deal in commodities and financial assets, advise clients on insurance, investment, taxation,
mortgages, pensions and other financial matters, and assist accounting and financial
professionals in managing an organisations financial affairs.

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 353
BUSINESS AND FINANCE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3531
3532
3533
3534
3535
3536
3537
3539

1

ESTIMATORS, VALUERS AND ASSESSORS
BROKERS
INSURANCE UNDERWRITERS
FINANCE AND INVESTMENT ANALYSTS/ADVISERS
TAXATION EXPERTS
IMPORTERS, EXPORTERS
FINANCIAL AND ACCOUNTING TECHNICIANS
BUSINESS AND RELATED ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS NEC

3531 ESTIMATORS, VALUERS AND
ASSESSORS
Estimators, valuers and assessors plan and undertake
the calculation of probable costs of civil, mechanical,
electrical, electronic and other projects, estimate the
value of property and chattels, and investigate
insurance claims to assess their validity and to assign
liability.

2

3

• assesses condition, location, desirability and
amenities of property to be valued;

• assesses costs of materials, labour time and other

4

factors such as required profit margins, transport
costs, tariffs and fare structures, possible hazards,
etc.;

• prepares comprehensive estimates of time and
costs and presents these in report or tender form;

5

• examines insurance documents to assess
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications. Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S
grades, A levels/H grades, GNVQs/GSVQs or
BTEC/SQA awards. Professional qualifications are
available and may be required by some employers.

TASKS

• examines plans, drawings, specifications, parts
lists, etc. and specifies the materials and
components required;

extent of liability and gathers information
about incident from police, medical records,
ship's log, etc. and investigates potential
fraudulent claims.

6

RELATED JOB TITLES

7

Building estimator
Estimator
Insurance assessor
Planner-estimator
Surveyor and valuer
Valuation surveyor
Valuer

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

139

Major Group 3

3532 BROKERS

RELATED JOB TITLES

Workers in this unit group deal in commodities,
stocks, shares and foreign exchange on behalf of
clients or on own account, broker insurance and
reinsurance, and buy and sell shipping and freight
space.

Commodity trader
Financial broker
Foreign exchange dealer (banking)
Insurance broker
Shipbroker
Stockbroker

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1

2

There are no formal academic requirements although
many employers require entrants to possess a degree
or equivalent qualification. Training is typically
undertaken in-house, although entrants may attend
courses run by professional institutions. Registration
with a regulatory authority may be required in some
positions.

• advises client on the suitability of particular
insurance schemes and places insurance on
behalf of client;

• discusses buying and/or selling requirements of

4

client and gives advice accordingly;

• analyses information concerning market trends
for commodities, financial assets and foreign
exchange and advises client/employer on the
suitability of a particular investment;

5

7

stocks, shares and bonds and calculates
transaction costs;

TASKS

• receives and assesses proposals and
propositions for insurance from brokers and
clients;

of insurance schemes and places insurance on
behalf of client;

• identifies and evaluates the risks associated with

• arranges for the production of auction catalogues,

• liaises with insurance surveyors, actuaries and

fixes reserve prices, attends auction and bids on
behalf of client, or negotiates purchase/sale by
private treaty of goods not sold at auction;

risk managers where the risks associated with a
proposal are not clear;

• obtains cargo space, fixes freight charges and
signs and issues bills of loading;

• collects freight charges from client and

8

There are no formal academic requirements,
although many employers expect entrants to study
for the associateship examinations of the Chartered
Insurance Institute. Entrants to professional
examinations usually require GCSEs/S grades and
A levels/H grades, an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ
Level III, or a BTEC/SQA award.

• records and transmits buy and sell orders for

• provides independent advice on the suitability

6

Workers in this unit group identify and measure the
risks associated with an activity, determine whether
this risk is insurable and issue insurance polices
which provide financial compensation in the event
of loss.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TASKS

3

3533 INSURANCE UNDERWRITERS

undertakes all necessary formalities
concerning customs and the loading/unloading
of cargo.

9
140

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

a proposal;

• calculates premiums, provides quotations and,
if acceptable to the client, issues policies;

• ensures that the insurance policy clearly defines
the liabilities accepted and any exceptions or
exclusions;

• negotiates terms of reinsurance contracts.

Major Group 3

RELATED JOB TITLES

3535 TAXATION EXPERTS

Insurance underwriter
Underwriter

Taxation experts advise clients on tax matters and
assess tax liabilities.

3534 FINANCE AND INVESTMENT
ANALYSTS/ADVISERS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Workers in this unit group advise customers on the
purchase of investment, insurance, mortgages,
pensions and other financial services and products.

Entry is possible with GCSEs/S grades or a BTEC/
SQA award, although many entrants possess a degree
or equivalent qualification. A professional
qualification is required in either accountancy or
taxation. Training is undertaken on-the-job and
usually takes approximately four years to complete.

1

TASKS

2

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements although
entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades. Training
is typically undertaken in-house, although entrants
may attend courses run by professional institutions.
Registration with a regulatory authority may be
required in some positions.

TASKS

• predicts the long and short term future
performance of securities and other financial
assets and advises upon what will be a good
investment for their clients;

• analyses the financial position of clients, taking
into account outgoings, dependants and
commitments;

• advises on the relative merits of pension schemes,
insurance policies and mortgages that best meet
the needs of clients given their personal
circumstances;

• examines accounts of industrial, commercial and
other establishments to determine their tax
liability and makes adjustments to claims where
necessary;

• considers particular problems concerning all
forms of personal and company taxation;

• stays abreast of all changes in tax law and

4

precedent;

• discusses disputed cases with accountants and
other specialists;

• represents Government/client in contested
claims before tax officials or an independent
tribunal.

• identifies and attracts new clients by arranging
visits and explaining the benefits of financial
products.

5

RELATED JOB TITLES

• undertakes administrative duties on behalf of
clients;

3

6

Inspector of taxes
Tax consultant
Tax senior
Taxation adviser

7
RELATED JOB TITLES

3536 IMPORTERS, EXPORTERS
Financial adviser
Financial consultant
Mortgage consultant
Pension adviser

Importers and exporters buy commodities from
overseas for the home market and sell homeproduced commodities to overseas markets.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

141

Major Group 3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry does not depend on academic qualifications
although some employers require candidates to have
a degree or equivalent qualification. Some posts
require candidates to have knowledge of a foreign
language. Professional qualifications are available.
Entrance to professional examinations requires
GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H grades or equivalent
qualifications.

• maintains profit and loss accounts, budgets,
• produces, collates and reports financial

TASKS

information for managers;

• investigates and evaluates home and overseas
demand for particular commodities;

• obtains orders from buyers and arranges payment
by bill of exchange, letter of credit or other
means;

• arranges for shipment of commodities overseas

3

TASKS

cashflow forecasts and other accounting records;

1

2

Association of Chartered Certified Accountants and
the Association of Accounting Technicians. These
qualifications can be linked to NVQs/SVQs in
Accounting at Levels 2, 3 and 4. Exemptions to
professional examinations may be granted to those
with certain academic qualifications.

and ensures that insurance and export licences
are in order;

• liaises with clients to ensure that payments are
made on time and credit limits are not exceeded;

• ensures invoices and payments are correct and
sent out on time;

• monitors accounting systems to determine
accounts are being maintained effectively and
provides information on accounting practices to
auditors.

• carries out customs clearance procedures for

4

imports, arranges their storage and delivery and
sells them personally or through a commodity
broker;

• advises home and overseas producers on the
likely future demand for their goods.

5

RELATED JOB TITLES
Export agent
Exporter
Importer

6
3537 FINANCIAL AND
ACCOUNTING TECHNICIANS

7

8

Financial and accounting technicians work alongside
accountants and other financial professionals in
managing the financial affairs of organisations.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements.
Professional qualifications are available from the

9
142

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Accounting technician
Financial controller

3539 BUSINESS AND RELATED
ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
NEC
Workers in this unit group advise on the effectiveness
of an organisation's procedures, systems and
methods, organise business conferences and
exhibitions and perform other business and related
occupations not elsewhere classified in MINOR
GROUP 353: Business and Finance Associate
Professionals.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades,
A levels/H grades, a BTEC/SQA award or equivalent
qualifications. Professional qualifications are
available and may be required by some employers.

Major Group 3

TASKS

• studies particular department or problem area and
assesses its interrelationships with other
activities;

• studies work methods and procedures by
measuring work involved and computing
standard times for specified activities, and
produces report detailing suggestions for
increasing efficiency and lowering costs;

• analyses project components, organises them into

1

a logical sequence and establishes the minimum
time required for the project;

• purchases services, receives payment from
clients, processes contracts and deals with
contractual arrangements;

2

• canvasses political opinion, writes and distributes
leaflets, writes and distributes press releases and
other such material to promote the image and
policies of a political party or election candidate,
arranges fund raising activities, and organises and
participates in election campaigns;

3

• discusses requirements for conferences,
exhibitions, functions or similar events, advises
on the facilities available, makes booking
arrangements and undertakes and makes any
further preparations required.

4

RELATED JOB TITLES

5

Conference co-ordinator
Exhibition officer
Management information officer
Work study engineer
Work study officer

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

143

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 354
SALES AND RELATED ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
Sales and related associate professionals purchase raw materials, equipment and
merchandise, provide technical sales advice to customers, undertake market research, and
arrange for the trading and leasing of property on behalf of clients.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3541
3542
3543
3544

1

2

3

BUYERS AND PURCHASING OFFICERS
SALES REPRESENTATIVES
MARKETING ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
ESTATE AGENTS, AUCTIONEERS

3541 BUYERS AND PURCHASING
OFFICERS
Buyers and purchasing officers organise and
undertake the buying of raw materials, equipment
and merchandise from manufacturers, importers,
wholesalers and other sources for wholesale
distribution, resale or for own internal use.

• prices merchandise, places repeat orders for fast
selling goods and arranges for promotions or
price reductions for slow selling lines;

• maintains records and prepares reports as
necessary.

RELATED JOB TITLES

4

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements although
many employers expect A levels/H grades, BTEC/
SQA awards or degrees. Professional qualifications
and NVQs/SVQs in Procurement at Levels 2, 3 and
4 are available.

TASKS

6

• attends trade fairs, shows and displays to examine
new product lines, examines price lists and
samples and selects the most suitable supplier
or places tenders with suitable firms;

7

• assesses budgetary limitations and customer
requirements and decides on quantity, type, range
and quality of goods or services to be bought;

• helps negotiate contract with supplier and
specifies details of goods or services required;

8

• ensures that delivered items comply with order,
monitors quality of incoming goods and returns
unsatisfactory or faulty items;

9
144

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Assistant buyer
Buyer
Media buyer
Procurement officer

3542 SALES REPRESENTATIVES
Sales representatives provide advice to existing
and potential customers, and receive orders for
specialist machinery, equipment, materials and
other products or services that require technical
knowledge.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements,
although entrants usually possess academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience in a
particular profession or speciality. Training is usually
on-the-job. Professional qualifications and NVQs/
SVQs at Levels 2 and 3 are available.

• discusses customer requirements and advises
them on the capabilities and limitations of the
goods or services being sold;

employer or client in order to identify
marketing requirements;

• establishes an appropriate quantitative and

• quotes prices, credit details, delivery dates and

qualitative market research methodology and
prepares proposals outlining programmes of
work and details of costs;

payment arrangements and arranges for delivery
and installation of goods if appropriate;

• collates and interprets findings of market

Major Group 3

TASKS

research and presents results to clients;

• makes follow up visits to ensure customer
satisfaction and to obtain further orders;

• stays abreast of advances in product/field and
suggests possible improvements to product or
service;

• maintains records and accounts of sales made
and handles customer complaints.

• discusses possible changes that need to be made
in terms of design, price, packaging, promotion
etc. in light of market research with appropriate
departments;

• briefs advertising team on client requirements,
monitors the progress of advertising campaigns
and liaises with client on potential modifications.

RELATED JOB TITLES

RELATED JOB TITLES

Manufacturer's agent
Salesman/woman (wholesale)
Technical representative

Account representative (advertising)
Commercial officer
Market researcher
Marketing consultant

3543 MARKETING ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS
Marketing associate professionals assist in the
development and implementation of projects which
aim to elicit the preferences and requirements of
consumers, businesses and other specified target
groups so that suppliers may meet these needs.

1

2

3

4

3544 ESTATE AGENTS,
AUCTIONEERS
Estate agents and auctioneers arrange for the
valuation, sale, purchase, rental and leasing of
property on behalf of clients.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic requirements,
although many entrants possess a BTEC/SQA award,
A levels/H grades, a degree or equivalent
qualification. Training is typically in-house,
supplemented by short courses or professional
qualifications provided by the Market Research
Society. NVQs/SVQs in Marketing Research are
available at Levels 3 and 4.

Entry is most common via membership of the
Professional Society for Valuers, Auctioneers and
Estate Agents. Entrants to professional training
possess GCSEs/S grades, an NVQ/SVQ at Level 2,
an Intermediate GNVQ/GSVQ Level II and/or
relevant experience. Off- and on-the-job training is
taken over a two year period.

5

6

7

TASKS
TASKS

• discusses client's requirements and may advise
• discusses business methods, products or
services and targets customer group with

8

client on the purchase of property and land for
investment and other purposes;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

145

Major Group 3

• conducts or arranges for structural surveys of
properties and undertakes any necessary
valuations of property or agricultural land;

• advises vendors and purchasers on market prices
of property, accompanies clients to view
property;

• markets the property on behalf of the vendor,
prepares written information and press
advertisements;

1

• negotiates land or property purchases, sales,
leases or tenancy agreements and arranges legal
formalities with solicitors, building societies and
other parties;

• makes inventories of property for sale, advises

2

vendor of suitable reserve price, issues
catalogues, conducts auction, notes bids and
records sale.

RELATED JOB TITLES

3

Auctioneer
Estate agent
Land agent
Letting agent

4

5

6

7

8

9
146

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this minor group are responsible for the planning, management, promotion and
day-to-day maintenance of areas of the environment in ways that are of benefit to wildlife
and the public.

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 355
CONSERVATION ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3551 CONSERVATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
OFFICERS
3552 COUNTRYSIDE AND PARK RANGERS

3551 CONSERVATION AND
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION OFFICERS
Conservation and environmental protection officers
are responsible for the scientific planning and daily
running of areas of the environment in a way that
reconciles the interests of conservation, land owners
and the public.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess a BTEC/SQA higher award
or degree although some employers may require a
higher degree or postgraduate qualification. Modern
Apprenticeships and NVQs/SVQs in Environmental
Conservation at Levels 2 and 3 are also available.

TASKS

• conducts ecological surveys to identify plant and

1

• organises and supervises conservation projects
and the work of part-time and voluntary staff;

2

• provides information to the public through setting
up displays, writing leaflets, making presentations
and addressing the media.

3

RELATED JOB TITLES
Conservation officer
Conservationist
Environmental protection officer
National park officer

4

5

3552 COUNTRYSIDE AND PARK
RANGERS
Countryside and park rangers look after the
countryside for the benefit of wildlife and the public
through practical conservation, environmental
education and liaison between land owners, local
communities and visitors.

6

animal species, map their habitat and draw up
conservation plans;

• liaises with conservation organisations, planning
authorities and land owners to establish nature
reserves and Sites of Special Scientific Interest,
and to identify and protect buildings and areas
of historical interest;

• carries out environmental assessments as to the
consequences of proposed new developments;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

7

Entrants usually possess a BTEC/SQA higher award
or degree although some employers may require a
higher degree or postgraduate qualification. A
majority of entrants have prior practical experience.
A range of training courses from professional

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

147

Major Group 3

associations and NVQs/SVQs in Environmental
Conservation at Levels 2 and 3 are available.

TASKS

• advises visitors, organises guided walks and
answers questions from the public about an area
and its wildlife;

• encourages environmental education through
addressing schools and community groups;

1

• patrols an area to monitor damage, erosion,
access to rights of way and the state of footpaths
and other facilities, and carries out remedial
maintenance work as necessary;

2

• acts as an intermediary between land owners,
visitors and the local community in disputes over
rights of access;

• works with the emergency services in instances
of fire, flood, injury or mountain rescue.

3
RELATED JOB TITLES

4

Countryside ranger
Countryside warden
Environmental warden
Park ranger

5

6

7

8

9
148

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Public service and other associate professionals supervise and undertake general
administrative functions in national and local government, advise upon and undertake
recruitment, staff appraisal and industrial relations activities, give advice regarding careers,
training and related opportunities, provide vocational training, undertake inspections and
investigations to ensure statutory compliance, implement health and safety measures within
establishments and organisations, and undertake inspections to ensure compliance with
environmental health regulations.

Major Group 3

MINOR GROUP 356
PUBLIC SERVICE AND OTHER ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS

1

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
3561 PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATE PROFESSIONALS
3562 PERSONNEL AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS OFFICERS
3563 VOCATIONAL AND INDUSTRIAL TRAINERS AND
INSTRUCTORS
3564 CAREERS ADVISERS AND VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE
SPECIALISTS
3565 INSPECTORS OF FACTORIES, UTILITIES AND TRADING
STANDARDS
3566 STATUTORY EXAMINERS
3567 OCCUPATIONAL HYGIENISTS AND SAFETY OFFICERS
(HEALTH AND SAFETY)
3568 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICERS

3561 PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATE
PROFESSIONALS
Public service associate professionals supervise and
undertake general administrative work in national
and local government departments, and organise the
activities of local offices of national government
departments.

2

3

4

5

TASKS

• co-ordinates activities of office staff, assigns
tasks and responsibilities and makes changes in
procedures to deal with variations in workload;

• assists senior government officers with policy

6

work, external liaison or general administrative
work;

• supervises a variety of administrative functions
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants typically possess A levels/H grades or an
equivalent qualification, although many entrants
possess a degree. Entry may be possible by promotion
from clerical grades for those with suitable experience.
Training is typically provided on-the-job,
supplemented by specialised courses. Professional
qualifications are available in some areas.

in government departments such as recruitment
and training, the negotiation and arrangement of
contracts, building and capital management,
monitoring and authorising department
expenditure etc.;

7

• organises resources for the acceptance and

8

recording of vacancy details, the selection of
suitable applicants and other Job Centre
activities;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

149

Major Group 3

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

• authorises the payment of social security benefits,

• arranges meetings between management and

arranges for domiciliary visits to assess the
financial circumstances of claimants and
investigates any state insurance contribution
problems;

employees or trades unions and assists with
negotiations concerning pay and conditions of
employment;

• advises public or companies on general tax
problems and arranges for the issue, receipt and
examination of tax forms, assessment of PAYE
codes and the computation of tax arrears and
rebates.

procedures, salary agreements and other
personnel and industrial relations issues;

• provides practical recruitment and selection
services to clients such as preparing
advertisements, checking application forms and
interviewing candidates.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Higher executive officer (government)
Principal officer (local government)
Senior executive officer (government)

3562 PERSONNEL AND
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
OFFICERS

RELATED JOB TITLES
Industrial relations officer
Personnel officer
Recruitment consultant

3563 VOCATIONAL AND
INDUSTRIAL TRAINERS AND
INSTRUCTORS

Personnel and industrial relations officers conduct
research and advise on recruitment, training, staff
appraisal and industrial relations policies and assist
specialist managers with negotiations on behalf of a
commercial enterprise, trades union or other
organisation.

Vocational and industrial trainers provide instruction
in manual, manipulative and other vocational skills
and advise on, plan and organise vocational
instruction within industrial, commercial and other
establishments.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic requirements although
most entrants possess a degree or equivalent
qualification and/or relevant experience. Many
employers expect staff to gain membership of the
Institute of Personnel Development through study
for professional qualifications. NVQs/SVQs in
Personnel Support are available at Level 3.

No formal educational qualifications are required
for entry, although most entrants have qualified in
some other area of work. Professional qualifications
are available from the Institute of Personnel and
Development. NVQs/SVQs in Training and
Development are available at Levels 3, 4 and 5.

TASKS
TASKS

• assesses training requirements and prepares

• undertakes research into pay differentials,
productivity and efficiency bonuses and other
payments;

8

• advises on training and recruitment, negotiating

• develops and recommends personnel and
industrial relations policies and assists with their
implementation;

9
150

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

lectures, demonstrations and study aids;

• supervises trainee development, assists trainees
with difficulties and prepares regular progress
reports on each trainee for management;

• arranges work experience and instructional visits
for trainees;

• liaises with employers to determine employment

updates or amends them in light of developments;

opportunities and advises schools, colleges or
individuals accordingly;

• advises on training programmes and discusses
progress or problems with staff and trainees;

• devises general and specialised training courses
in response to particular needs.

• organises careers forums and exhibitions and
establishes and maintains contact with local
employers and/or training organisations and
TECs;

Major Group 3

• plans curriculum and rota of staff duties and

• monitors progress and welfare of young people
RELATED JOB TITLES
Staff trainer
Technical instructor
Training consultant
Training instructor
Training officer

3564 CAREERS ADVISERS AND
VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE
SPECIALISTS
Workers in this unit group give advice on careers or
occupations, training courses and related matters,
direct school leavers and other job seekers into
employment and assess their progress.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants to training usually possess a degree, an
approved diploma or equivalent qualification.
Professional training towards the Diploma in Careers
Guidance consists of a one-year full-time course
followed by a one-year probationary period of onthe-job training.

TASKS

• uses an interview, questionnaire and/or
psychological or other test to determine the
aptitude, preferences and temperament of the
client;

• advises on appropriate courses of study or
avenues into employment;

• visits educational and other establishments to
give talks and distribute information regarding
careers;

in employment and advises them on any
difficulties.

1
RELATED JOB TITLES
Careers adviser
Careers officer
Placement co-ordinator
Placement officer

2

3565 INSPECTORS OF FACTORIES,
UTILITIES AND TRADING
STANDARDS
Inspectors of factories, utilities and trading standards
undertake investigations and inspections to verify
and ensure compliance with acts, regulations and
other requirements regarding weights, measures and
trade descriptions, the installation and safety of
electrical, gas and water supplies and equipment and
the welfare, health and safety in factories and all
work sites subject to the provisions in the Factory
Acts.

3

4

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess A levels/H grades, a degree
or equivalent qualification. Professional
qualifications, postgraduate diplomas and NVQs/
SVQs at Levels 3 and 4 are available and may be
required in some occupations.

6

7
TASKS

• inspects measuring and similar equipment in
factories and visits street traders, shops, garages
and other premises to check scales, weights and
measuring equipment;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

151

Major Group 3

• inspects factories and other work sites to ensure
adequate cleanliness, temperature, lighting and
ventilation, checks for fire hazards and inspects
storage and handling arrangements of dangerous
materials;

• visits sites during construction and inspects
completed installations of electricity, gas or water
supply;

• draws attention to any irregularities or

1

2

TASKS

• verifies the weight of vehicles, checks drivers
licence and the number of hours worked;

• takes regular samples of river water for
laboratory analysis and removes any diseased fish
from the river;

• visits premises discharging effluent into river and
advises on ways of preventing pollution;

infringements of regulations and advises on ways
of rectifying them;

• prevents illegal fishing and inspects and verifies

• investigates industrial accidents or any

• visits kennels, race courses, slaughterhouses and

complaints made by the public, prepares
reports and recommendations on all
inspections made and recommends legal
action where necessary.

other areas where animals are kept, investigates
any complaints and advises on animal care;

fishing licences;

• provides first aid treatment for animals and
undertakes humane killing where necessary;

• undertakes other inspections not elsewhere
RELATED JOB TITLES

3

4

Gas inspector
Inspector of factories (government)
Inspector of weights and measures
Installation inspector (electricity, gas)
Plumbing inspector
Trading standards officer

3566 STATUTORY EXAMINERS

5

6

7

8

Workers in this unit group undertake investigations
and inspections to ensure compliance with bye-laws,
acts and other regulations concerning river pollution
and use of fishing grounds, the condition and
standard of ships' structures, equipment and
accommodation, the treatment of animals, the
operation of commercial, passenger and road goods
vehicles and other miscellaneous concerns/issues not
elsewhere classified.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is most common with experience gained in
employment, but is possible with GCSEs/S grades
or A levels/H grades. On-the-job training is provided
and professional qualifications are available and are
required for some posts.

9
152

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

classified, including alkali, drugs, explosives,
flight operations, horticulture, wages and mining
inspections.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Driving examiner (Dept of Transport)
Fishery officer
Flight examiner
National Insurance inspector
Pollution control officer
RSPCA inspector
Water bailiff

3567 OCCUPATIONAL HYGIENISTS
AND SAFETY OFFICERS
(HEALTH AND SAFETY)
Workers in this unit group counsel employees on
personal, domestic and other problems and
grievances, advise on industrial health and safety and
co-ordinate accident prevention and safety measures
within an establishment or organisation.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess an NVQ/SVQ at Level 4 in
Occupational Health and Safety Practice or a national

Environmental Health requires candidates to possess
an accredited degree or postgraduate qualification
and to complete a year of assessed practical training
and further professional examinations.

TASKS

Major Group 3

diploma awarded by the National Examination Board
in Occupational Safety and Health. After three years
relevant experience, holders of these qualifications can
apply for membership of the Institution of
Occupational Safety and Health.

TASKS

• inspects and investigates housing and working
• assists employees in need of accommodation and
maintains contact with those off work due to illness;

• counsels individuals on any personal or domestic
problems affecting their work;

• inspects factory and other work areas to ensure
compliance with health and safety legislation;

• instructs workers in the proper use of protective
clothing and safety devices;

• compiles statistics on accidents and injuries,

conditions, conditions under which food, drink
and drugs are manufactured and stored,
atmospheric pollution, drainage, sewage and
refuse disposal, noise levels, etc. to ensure
compliance with government regulations;

• makes visits and inspections in accordance with
a planned programme or in response to
complaints;

• advises on ways of rectifying conditions that

2

contravene regulations;

analyses their causes and makes
recommendations to management accordingly;

• prepares reports and recommendations on all

• gives talks and distributes information on

• recommends legal action in cases of persistent

accident prevention;

1

inspections made;

3

contravention of regulations.

• carries out routine tests on safety devices and
protective clothing.
RELATED JOB TITLES
RELATED JOB TITLES
Health and Safety officer
Occupational hygienist
Safety adviser
Safety officer

4

Authorised meat inspector
Environmental health inspector
Environmental health officer
Public health officer

5

3568 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
OFFICERS

6

Environmental health officers undertake inspections
and investigations to verify and ensure compliance
with government acts, orders and regulations relating
to environmental hygiene and the general health of
the public.

7

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8

Entry will require GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H
grades. Registration to the Chartered Institute of

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

153

Occupations within this major group undertake general administrative, clerical and
secretarial work, and perform a variety of specialist client-orientated clerical duties. The
main tasks involve retrieving, updating, classifying and distributing documents,
correspondence and other records held electronically and in storage files; typing, wordprocessing and otherwise preparing documents; operating other office and business
machinery; receiving and directing telephone calls to an organisation; and routing
information through organisations.
Most occupations in this major group will require a good standard of general education.
Certain occupations will require further additional vocational training or professional
occupations to a well-defined standard.

Major Group 4

MAJOR GROUP 4
ADMINISTRATIVE AND SECRETARIAL
OCCUPATIONS

1

2

Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:

3

41 ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS
411
412
413
414
415

ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: GOVERNMENT AND
RELATED ORGANISATIONS
ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: FINANCE
ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: RECORDS
ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: COMMUNICATIONS
ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: GENERAL

4

5

42 SECRETARIAL AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
421

SECRETARIAL AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

155

Major Group 4

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 41
ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this sub-major group undertake administrative and clerical work in government
departments and non-governmental organisations; perform specialist clerical tasks in relation
to financial records and transactions, the administration of pension and insurance policies,
the storage and transportation of freight, the activities of libraries, market research and
database administration; operate telecommunications equipment and perform other general
clerical tasks.

1

2

MINOR GROUP 411
ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: GOVERNMENT AND
RELATED ORGANISATIONS
Workers in this minor group undertake a variety of administrative and clerical work in
government departments and non-governmental organisations.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

3

4111
4112
4113
4114

4

CIVIL SERVICE EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
CIVIL SERVICE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND ASSISTANTS
LOCAL GOVERNMENT CLERICAL OFFICERS AND ASSISTANTS
OFFICERS OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS

4111 CIVIL SERVICE EXECUTIVE
OFFICERS

5

6

7

Workers in this unit group undertake administrative
duties within government offices and departments,
and supervise the activities of junior administrative
and clerical staff.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible with GCSEs/S grades and A levels/
H grades, BTEC/SQA awards or GNVQs/GSVQs,
although many entrants are graduates. Off- and onthe-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs and
professional qualifications are available for certain
areas of work.

• undertakes random or regular checks of work to
assess output and quality;

• ensures that accounting, verifying, recording and
other prescribed procedures are adhered to;

• advises on the purchase of office equipment and
supplies;

• assists senior government officers with policy
work, external liaison or general administrative
work;

• undertakes administrative and supervisory duties
specific to the operation of Inland Revenue
offices, Job Centres, Benefits Agency offices and
other local offices of national government.

RELATED JOB TITLES

8

TASKS

• plans work schedules, assigns duties and supervises
the activities of administrative and clerical staff;

9
156

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Adviser (Job Centre)
Executive officer (government)
Revenue executive (government)

Civil Service administrative officers and assistants
undertake a variety of clerical work in national
government departments, and in local offices of
national government departments.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible with GCSEs/S grades, and/or
relevant practical experience. NVQs/SVQs in
Administration are available at Levels 2 and 3.
Modern Apprenticeships leading to NVQ/SVQ at
Level 3 are also available.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades.
Evidence of keyboard skills may also be required in
some posts. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.
NVQs/SVQs in Administration are available at
Levels 2 and 3.

Major Group 4

4112 CIVIL SERVICE
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS
AND ASSISTANTS

TASKS

• computes cost of product/services and maintains

1

and balances records of financial transactions;

• prepares and checks invoices and verifies
accuracy of records;

• receives and pays out cash and cheques and

2

performs closely related clerical duties;
TASKS

• maintains and updates correspondence,
documents, data and other records for storage in
files or on computer;

• classifies, sorts and files publications,
correspondence etc. in offices and libraries;

• responds to telephone enquiries and other forms
of correspondence;

• undertakes a variety of clerical tasks specific to
the operations of Inland Revenue offices, Job
Centres, Benefits Agency offices and other local
offices of national government;

• performs miscellaneous clerical tasks such as
proof reading printed material, drafting letters,
taking minutes etc.

RELATED JOB TITLES

• operates data processing equipment to update
and maintain data, correspondence and other
records for storage or despatch;

3

• arranges, classifies and indexes publications,
correspondence and other material in libraries
and offices;

• performs other clerical duties not elsewhere
classified including preparing financial
information for management, proof reading
printed material and drafting letters in reply to
correspondence or telephone enquiries.

4

5
RELATED JOB TITLES
Administrative assistant (local government)
Clerical assistant (local government)
Clerical officer (local government)
Local government officer

6

Administrative assistant (government)
Administrative officer (government)
Revenue assistant (government)

4113 LOCAL GOVERNMENT
CLERICAL OFFICERS AND
ASSISTANTS
Local government clerical officers and assistants
undertake a variety of clerical duties in local
government offices and departments.

4114 OFFICERS OF NONGOVERNMENTAL
ORGANISATIONS

7

Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
administrative and clerical tasks in the running of
trade associations, employers' associations, learned
societies, trade unions, charitable organisations and
similar bodies.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

157

Major Group 4

1

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements although
pre-entry experience is usually necessary. Some
organisations only employ their own members,
although evidence of related work within pressure
groups, the voluntary sector, trade unions or other
organisations is generally sufficient.

TASKS

• maintains and updates records of membership
details, subscription fees, mailing lists, etc.;

• circulates and reports information of relevance

2

to members and interested parties;

• arranges meetings, conferences and other events
and circulates agenda and other relevant material;

• receives and responds to written and telephone

3

correspondence from members and other
organisations;

• undertakes fund raising activities within a
specified geographical area;

• prepares and provides measures of organisational

4

activity for senior officials.

RELATED JOB TITLES

5

Branch secretary (charitable organisation)
Charity administrator
Official (trade union)
Organiser (trade union)

6

7

8

9
158

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this minor group perform administrative and other tasks in relation to credit
control and debt collection, the maintenance of financial records within firms, financial
transactions made with customers and the collection of payments from businesses and
households.

Major Group 4

MINOR GROUP 412
ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: FINANCE

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
4121 CREDIT CONTROLLERS
4122 ACCOUNTS AND WAGES CLERKS, BOOK-KEEPERS, OTHER
FINANCIAL CLERKS
4123 COUNTER CLERKS

1

2
4121 CREDIT CONTROLLERS

RELATED JOB TITLES

Credit controllers perform financial, administrative
and other tasks in relation to credit control and debt
collection.

Credit control clerk
Credit controller
Credit supervisor

3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

4122 ACCOUNTS AND WAGES
CLERKS, BOOK-KEEPERS,
OTHER FINANCIAL CLERKS

4

Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades but is
also possible with other academic qualifications.
Professional qualifications are available and may be
required for some posts.

Accounts and wages clerks, book-keepers, and other
financial clerks, maintain and balance records of
financial transactions, calculate hours worked, wages
due and other relevant contributions/deductions and
perform other financial and related clerical duties.

5

TASKS

• receives requests for credit submissions and
lending proposals;

• arranges for investigations of the credit
worthiness of individuals or companies;

• deals with any enquiries or difficulties
concerning the acceptance or rejection of credit
applications;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades
or equivalent qualifications. Training is typically
provided on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in Administration
are available at Levels 1 and 2.

7

• checks that accounting, recording and statutory
procedures are adhered to for all credit
transactions;

• arranges for the collection of arrears of payment.

TASKS

• checks and records accuracy of daily records of
financial transactions;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

159

Major Group 4

• prepares provisional balances and reconciles
these with appropriate accounts;

• calculates and records hours worked, wages due,
deductions and voluntary contributions;

• compiles schedules and distributes or arranges
distribution of wages and salaries;

• calculates costs and overheads and prepares

• receives and pays out cash, cheques, money
orders, credit notes, foreign currency or travellers
cheques;

• provides postal services, pays pensions, Job
Seekers' Allowance and other state benefits to
claimants, supplies official forms and
documentation to the public, and performs other
tasks specific to the activities of a post office.

analyses for management.
RELATED JOB TITLES

1

RELATED JOB TITLES

2

Accounts assistant
Accounts clerk
Audit assistant
Bookkeeper
Cost clerk
Ledger clerk
Wages clerk

3

4123 COUNTER CLERKS

4

Counter clerks deal with the payment of money,
cheques and other financial claims and open and
close accounts. Advise upon financial products and
services offered by banks, building societies and post
offices.

5

6

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, A
levels/H grades or an Advanced GNVQ/GSVQ Level
III. On-the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in
Providing Financial Services (Banks and Building
Societies) are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.

TASKS

7

• deals with enquiries from customers, other banks
and other authorised enquirers;

• maintains records of transactions and compiles
information;

8

• advises customers on financial services and
products available;

9
160

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Bank clerk
Box office clerk
Cashier (bank, building society)
Cashier (bookmakers, turf accountants)
Clerk (bank, building society)
Post office clerk
Ticket seller

Workers in this minor group create, maintain, update and file correspondence, data,
documents and information held electronically for storage and despatch.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
4131
4132
4133
4134
4135
4136
4137

FILING AND OTHER RECORDS ASSISTANTS/CLERKS
PENSIONS AND INSURANCE CLERKS
STOCK CONTROL CLERKS
TRANSPORT AND DISTRIBUTION CLERKS
LIBRARY ASSISTANTS/CLERKS
DATABASE ASSISTANTS/CLERKS
MARKET RESEARCH INTERVIEWERS

4131 FILING AND OTHER
RECORDS ASSISTANTS/
CLERKS
Filing and other records assistants and clerks
maintain and update documents, correspondence and
other records and organises their storage.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades
or equivalent qualifications. Training is typically
provided on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in Administration
at Levels 1 and 2 are available.

TASKS

• examines and sorts incoming material;
• classifies, files, archives and locates documents

Major Group 4

MINOR GROUP 413
ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: RECORDS

1

2

RELATED JOB TITLES

3

Filing clerk
Lottery assistant
Records clerk
Technical clerk

4132 PENSIONS AND INSURANCE
CLERKS
Pensions and insurance clerks provide general
clerical support to senior colleagues and perform
specialist clerical tasks in relation to the
administration of pension and insurance policies.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.
Training is usually provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Insurance are available at Levels 2 and 3.
Professional qualifications are also available.

and other records;

• copies or duplicates documents or other records;

TASKS

• performs specialised clerical tasks in connection

• answers queries from clients and assists in

with conveyancing, litigation and the
maintenance of medical records.

interpreting and completing information
requested on forms;

4

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

161

Major Group 4

• checks forms completed by clients and contacts

• receives enquiries and orders from customers,

clients to obtain additional information or to
clarify details;

and quotes prices, discounts, delivery dates and
other relevant information;

• makes arrangements for financial advisers to visit

• prepares requisitions, consignments and other

clients and potential customers;

• transfers information from application forms and
other documentation to computerised records;

• receives notice of changes to personal
circumstances and updates files;

1

• issues application forms, policy documents,
reminders, claims forms and other standard
documentation;

• performs general clerical duties to support senior
staff.

2
RELATED JOB TITLES

3

4

• checks requisitions against stock records and
forwards to issuing department;

• adjusts stock records as orders are received,
reports on damaged stock and prepares
requisitions to replenish damaged stock.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Material controller
Progress chaser
Stock control clerk
Stock controller

Claims handler
Insurance clerk
Pensions administrator

4134 TRANSPORT AND
DISTRIBUTION CLERKS

4133 STOCK CONTROL CLERKS

Workers in this unit group perform various clerical
functions related to the transport and distribution of
goods and freight.

Stock control clerks receive orders from customers,
prepare requisitions or despatch documents for
ordered goods, maintain and update records, files
and other correspondence regarding in relation to
the storage and despatch of goods.

5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

despatch documents;

There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.
Training is usually provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs are available at Levels 2 and 3.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.
Training is usually provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs considering various aspects of road
distribution and cargo operations are available at
Levels 1, 2 and 3.

TASKS

• processes customer orders and forwards

7

requisition documentation to storage and
distribution personnel;

TASKS

• receives and checks in deliveries from suppliers
or completed stock to be despatched to
customers;

8

• allocates appropriate storage space in accordance
with stock control and space utilisation policies;

9
162

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

• formulates delivery loads, vehicle schedules and
routes to be followed by delivery staff;

• monitors tachograph readings and maintains
records of hours worked and distance travelled
by drivers;

and export documentation necessary for the
movement of goods between countries;

• maintains records regarding the movement and
location of freight, containers and staff.

4136 DATABASE ASSISTANTS/
CLERKS
Database assistants and clerks create, maintain,
preserve and update information held in electronic
databases, computer files, voice-mailboxes and email systems.

Major Group 4

• obtains customs clearance and processes import

RELATED JOB TITLES
Distribution co-ordinator
Fleet administrator
Fleet controller
Shipping clerk
Transport clerk

4135 LIBRARY ASSISTANTS/
CLERKS
Library assistants and clerks classify, sort and file
publications, documents, audio-visual and
computerised material in libraries and offices.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.
Training is usually provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Information and Library Services are
available at Levels 2 and 3.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.
Training is usually provided on-the-job.

1

TASKS

2

• receives, checks, prioritises and assembles
information for inputting;

• operates keyboard to edit, update and create files,
to enter data and to retrieve data or produce
output;

• checks accuracy through validation of
information inputted and monitoring the
consistency of any output;

• reports failures to systems programmers and

4

engineers;

• enters database to search for information and
answer enquiries;

• performs general clerical duties including
TASKS

3

5

maintaining records and completing worksheets.

• sorts, catalogues and maintains library records;
• locates and retrieves material on request for
borrowers;

• issues library material and records date of issue/
due date for return;

RELATED JOB TITLES

6

Computer clerk
Data entry clerk
Data processor
VDU operator

• classifies, labels and indexes new books;
• performs simple repairs on old books.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Library assistant
Library clerk

7
4137 MARKET RESEARCH
INTERVIEWERS
Market research interviewers conduct interviews to
collect information on the opinions and preferences
of consumers, businesses, the electorate and other
selected groups.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

163

Major Group 4

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Market Research (Interviewing) are
available at Level 2.

TASKS

1

• approaches members of the public, individuals,
households and organisations to arrange and
conduct face to face interviews, telephone
interviews, focus groups, panel interviews etc.;

• records progress of interviews by noting answers,

2

completing questionnaires, making audio or
visual recordings or inputting responses into a
computer;

• collects questionnaires, diaries, and other

3

research materials left with interviewees and
conducts follow-up interviews;

• collates and reviews information collected and
writes reports.

4

RELATED JOB TITLES
Market research interviewer
Market researcher (interviewing)
Telephone interviewer

5

6

7

8

9
164

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this minor group operate switchboards, receive and direct telephone calls, provide
advice and assistance in making telephone calls and operate other telecommunications
equipment.

Major Group 4

MINOR GROUP 414
ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: COMMUNICATIONS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
4141 TELEPHONISTS
4142 COMMUNICATION OPERATORS

4141 TELEPHONISTS
Telephonists receive and direct callers in
commercial, industrial and other establishments, and
operate telephone (public) and office (private)
switchboards to advise on, and assist with, making
telephone calls and to relay incoming, outgoing and
internal calls.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Academic qualifications may not be required. Onthe-job training is provided.

TASKS

• receives callers and directs them to appropriate
person or department;

• operates switchboard to connect outgoing calls
or to relay incoming or internal calls;

• reports any faults on telephone operating system;
• gives advice on dialling and other special features
available;

• provides directory information, dialling codes
and details of charges;

1

4142 COMMUNICATION
OPERATORS
Workers in this unit group operate
telecommunications equipment to transmit and
receive signals and messages.

2

3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Academic qualifications may not be required. Onthe-job training is provided.

4

TASKS

• receives messages, weather reports and other
material to transmit;

• tunes transmitter to required channel or

5

wavelength and relays or receives message to/
from person or vehicle;

• uses a teleprinter or telex keyboard to transmit
messages to other teleprinters or telexes;

6

• keeps record of messages sent and received;
• performs routine tests and maintenance on
equipment and reports faults.

7

• alerts emergency services in cases of fire, crime
or accident.
RELATED JOB TITLES
RELATED JOB TITLES
Switchboard operator (telephone)
Telephone operator
Telephonist

Communications operator
Control room operator (emergency services)
Radio operator
Telecommunications officer
Telex operator

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

165

Major Group 4

MINOR GROUP 415
ADMINISTRATIVE OCCUPATIONS: GENERAL
Workers in this minor group perform a variety of clerical tasks and comprise people described
as 'clerk', 'clerical assistant' or with other job titles lacking specific details.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit group:
4150 GENERAL OFFICE ASSISTANTS/CLERKS

1

2

3

4

4150 GENERAL OFFICE
ASSISTANTS/CLERKS
Workers in this unit group are responsible for
recording, filing and disseminating information for
a business, organisation or individual.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades.
Training is usually provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Administration are available at Levels 2
and 3.

TASKS

5

• stores information by filling in forms, writing
notes and filing records;

• types reports, memos, notes, minutes and other
documents;

• receives and distributes incoming and outgoing

6

correspondence;

• checks figures, prepares invoices and records
details of financial transactions made.

7

RELATED JOB TITLES

8

Clerical assistant
Clerical officer
Clerk
Clerk-typist
Office supervisor

9
166

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Secretarial occupations perform general secretarial, clerical and organisational duties in
support of management and other workers.

Major Group 4

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 42
SECRETARIAL AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS

MINOR GROUP 421
SECRETARIAL AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group provide shorthand and audio dictation services, type, edit and
print documents using typewriters, word processors or personal computers, perform general
clerical and organisational duties in support of management or other workers, and receive
and direct clients and visitors to commercial, government and other establishments.

1

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

2

4211
4212
4213
4214
4215
4216
4217

MEDICAL SECRETARIES
LEGAL SECRETARIES
SCHOOL SECRETARIES
COMPANY SECRETARIES
PERSONAL ASSISTANTS AND OTHER SECRETARIES
RECEPTIONISTS
TYPISTS

3

4

4211 MEDICAL SECRETARIES

TASKS

Medical secretaries file and maintain medical and
other records, transcribe notes and dictation into
typewritten form and perform other routine clerical
tasks in hospitals/surgeries and other medical
establishments.

• sorts and files correspondence;
• writes down dictated matter in shorthand and

5

transcribes it into typewritten form;

• transcribes audio dictation into typewritten form;
• maintain patients' records and arranges

6

appointments;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• answers enquiries and refers patient to
appropriate experts;

• organises and attends meetings and keeps records
Entrants require GCSEs/S grades or an Intermediate
GNVQ/GSVQ Level II. To qualify as a medical
secretary, entrants take a one-year full-time or twoyear part-time diploma in medical secretarial studies.
NVQs/SVQs in Administration are available at
Levels 2, 3 and 4.

of proceedings.

7

RELATED JOB TITLES
Doctor's secretary
Medical secretary

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

167

Major Group 4

1

2

4212 LEGAL SECRETARIES
Legal secretaries file and maintain legal and other
records, transcribe notes and dictation into
typewritten form and perform other routine clerical
tasks in legal practices.

typically require GCSEs/S grades. NVQs/SVQs in
Administration are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.

TASKS

• sorts and files correspondence;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• writes down dictated matter into shorthand and

There are no formal academic requirements,
although employers may expect candidate to possess
a legal secretarial qualification. Entrants to
professional legal courses typically require GCSEs/
S grades or equivalent qualifications. NVQs/SVQs
in Administration are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.

• transcribes audio dictation into typewritten form;

transcribes it into typewritten form;

• maintains administrative files and records of
attendance;

• handles enquiries from parents and arranges
meetings with members of staff.

TASKS
RELATED JOB TITLES

• sorts and files correspondence;
• writes down dictated matter into shorthand and

3

School clerk
School secretary

transcribes it into typewritten form;

• transcribes audio dictation into typewritten form;

4214 COMPANY SECRETARIES

• maintains court and clients' records and arranges
appointments;

4

• answers enquiries and directs clients to
appropriate experts;

Company secretaries (excluding qualified chartered
secretaries) file and maintain company records,
translate notes and dictation into typewritten form
and perform other routine clerical tasks within
commercial organisations.

• attends meetings and keeps records of
proceedings.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5
RELATED JOB TITLES
Legal secretary
Litigation secretary

6
4213 SCHOOL SECRETARIES

7

School secretaries file and maintain school and other
records, translate notes and dictation into
typewritten form and perform other routine clerical
tasks within schools.

There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants to professional secretarial courses
typically require GCSEs/S grades. NVQs/SVQs in
Administration are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.

TASKS

• sorts, distributes and files correspondence;
• writes down dictated matter into shorthand and
transcribes it into typewritten form;

8

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATE QUALIFICATIONS

• transcribes audio dictation into typewritten form;
• arranges meetings, circulates agenda and keeps
records of proceedings;

There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entrants to professional secretarial courses

9
168

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

• directs enquiries to appropriate members of staff.

4216 RECEPTIONISTS

Club secretary
Company secretary

Receptionists receive and direct telephone calls and
visitors to commercial, government and other
establishments.

4215 PERSONAL ASSISTANTS AND
OTHER SECRETARIES
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
secretarial tasks for individuals or within
organisations not elsewhere classified in MINOR
GROUP 421: Secretarial and Related Occupations.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic requirements,
although entry to professional secretarial courses
typically requires GCSEs/S grades. NVQs/SVQs
are available in Administration at Levels 2, 3 and 4.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although many employers expect entrants to possess
GCSEs/S grades. There are a variety of relevant
vocational qualifications available. NVQs/SVQs in
Administration are available at Level 2 and
encompass various aspects of reception work.
Professional qualifications are also available.

the appropriate person or department;

2

3

• records the details of enquiries and makes

• acts as a first point of contact for a manager with
colleagues and
organisations;

1

TASKS

• receives callers and clients and directs them to
TASKS

Major Group 4

RELATED JOB TITLES

people

from

outside

• arranges appointments, organises travel
arrangements and makes reservations;

• maintains, sorts and files correspondence and
other documentation;

appointments and reservations;

• deals with telephone enquiries;
• supplies brochures, pamphlets and other

4

information for clients;

• records details of visitors, issues security passes
and informs visitors of any actions to be taken in
case of an emergency.

• writes down dictated matter in shorthand and

5

transcribes it into typewritten form;

• attends meetings and keeps records of
proceedings;

• translates documents and liaises with overseas
clients and suppliers.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Doctor's receptionist
Receptionist
Secretary-receptionist

6

4217 TYPISTS

7

RELATED JOB TITLES
Bilingual secretary
Farm secretary
Manager's personal assistant
Personal managerial assistant
Secretary

Workers in this unit group type letters, minutes,
memos, reports and other documents from written
or dictated matter, using typewriters, word
processors or personal computers.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

169

Major Group 4

1

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades.
Entrants are normally expected to have obtained
minimum typing speeds and hold professional
certificates. Units in keyboarding skills and
producing documents are included in NVQs/SVQs
in Administration at Levels 1 to 4.

TASKS

• types letters, minutes, memos, reports and other
documents;

• proof reads, edits and corrects errors to produce

2

clean copy to specified layout;

• adjusts settings of printer as necessary and
monitors quality of printed document.

3

RELATED JOB TITLES
Audio typist
Shorthand typist
Typist
Word processor operator

4

5

6

7

8

9
170

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

This major group covers occupations whose tasks involve the performance of complex
physical duties that normally require a degree of initiative, manual dexterity and other
practical skills. The main tasks of these occupations require experience with, and
understanding of, the work situation, the materials worked with and the requirements of
the structures, machinery and other items produced.
Most occupations in this major group have a level of skill commensurate with a substantial
period of training, often provided by means of work-based training programme.

Major Group 5

MAJOR GROUP 5
SKILLED TRADES OCCUPATIONS

1

Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:

2

51 SKILLED AGRICULTURAL TRADES
511

AGRICULTURAL TRADES

3

52 SKILLED METAL AND ELECTRICAL TRADES
521
522
523
524

METAL FORMING, WELDING AND RELATED TRADES
METAL MACHINING, FITTING AND INSTRUMENT MAKING
TRADES
VEHICLE TRADES
ELECTRICAL TRADES

4

53 SKILLED CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING TRADES
531
532

5

CONSTRUCTION TRADES
BUILDING TRADES

54 TEXTILES, PRINTING AND OTHER SKILLED TRADES
541
542
543
549

6

TEXTILES AND GARMENTS TRADES
PRINTING TRADES
FOOD PREPARATION TRADES
SKILLED TRADES NEC

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

171

Major Group 5

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 51
SKILLED AGRICULTURAL TRADES
Skilled agricultural trades cultivate crops, raise animals and catch fish for consumption,
grow plants and trees for sale, tend gardens, parks, sports pitches and other recreational
areas, and maintain areas of forestry.

MINOR GROUP 511
AGRICULTURAL TRADES

1

2

Workers within agricultural trades cultivate crops and raise animals for consumption, grow
plants, trees, shrubs and flowers for sale, tend private and public gardens, parks, sports
pitches and other recreational areas, and perform a variety of other skilled occupations
related to agriculture and fishing.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

3

5111
5112
5113
5119

FARMERS
HORTICULTURAL TRADES
GARDENERS AND GROUNDSMEN/GROUNDSWOMEN
AGRICULTURAL AND FISHING TRADES NEC

4

5111 FARMERS
Farmers and related occupations cultivate arable
crops, fruits and trees, and raise cattle, sheep, pigs,
poultry and other livestock for consumption.

5

6

combine harvesters, straw balers, milking
machines and tractors;

• arranges for the sale of crops, livestock and other
farm produce;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No formal academic qualifications are required.
Training is typically received on-the-job. A variety
of vocational qualifications in agriculture are
available, including NVQs/SVQs at Levels 1 to 4.

TASKS

7

• operates and maintains farm machinery such as

• maintains records of production, finance and
breeding.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Agricultural contractor
Farmer
Herd manager
Small holder

• feeds and waters animals, supervises births, treats
minor ailments and calls vet if necessary;

• plants, propagates, sprays, fertilises and harvests
field crops and horticultural produce;

8

• undertakes farm maintenance tasks such as
fencing, hedging, cleaning and building
maintenance;

9
172

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

5112 HORTICULTURAL TRADES
Horticultural trades workers intensively cultivate
vegetables, plants, fruit, shrubs, trees and flowers
in greenhouses, market gardens, nurseries and
orchards.

TASKS

• levels ground and installs drainage system as
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
NVQs/SVQs in Horticulture are available at Levels
1, 2 and 3. Professional qualifications from the
Royal Horticultural Society are also available.

required;

• prepares soil and plants and transplants, prunes,
weeds and otherwise tends plant life;

Major Group 5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• protects plants from pests and diseases;
TASKS

• cuts and lays turf using hand and machine tools
and repairs damaged turf;

• prepares soil in field, bed or pot by hand or
machine;

• mixes soil, composts, fertilisers and/or organic
matter and spreads fertiliser and manure;

• moves soil to alter surface contour of land using
mechanical equipment and constructs paths,
rockeries, ponds and other features;

1

• rolls, mows and waters grass.

• sows seeds and bulbs and transplants seedlings;
• propagates plants by taking cuttings and by
grafting and budding, applies weed-killer,
fungicide and insecticide to control pests and
diseases;

• prunes and thins trees and shrubs;
• supports trees by staking and wiring.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Horticulturist (market gardening)
Market gardener
Nurseryman
Propagator

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Gardener
Greenkeeper
Groundsman/groundswoman
Landscape gardener
Turf cutter

3

5119 AGRICULTURAL AND
FISHING TRADES NEC

4

Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
agricultural and fishing occupations not elsewhere
classified in MINOR GROUP 511: Agricultural
Trades.

5113 GARDENERS AND
GROUNDSMEN/
GROUNDSWOMEN

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Gardeners and groundsmen/groundswomen cultivate
flowers, trees, shrubs and other plants in public and
private gardens, construct artificial features to
improve the appearance of existing terrain, cut and
lay turf and maintain areas for sports and recreation.

No formal academic qualifications are required.
Training is typically received on-the-job. A variety
of vocational and academic qualifications in fish
farming, forestry, horse and other animal care are
available. Professional qualifications are also
available and may be mandatory in some areas.

5

6

7
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TASKS

• nets river fish and feeds and maintains them in
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
NVQs/SVQs in Horticulture are available at Levels
1, 2 and 3, and in Sports Turf Management at Level
4. Professional qualifications are also available.

spawning pens, cultivates and harvests oysters,
mussels and clams on natural and artificial beds,
treats water and diseased fish, and empties and
cleans outdoor tanks;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

173

Major Group 5

• commands, navigates and maintains shipping
vessels, assists with the shooting, hauling and
repairing of nets, prepares, lays and empties
baited pots, and guts, sorts and stows fish;

• establishes and maintains forest nurseries,
forestry and woodland, and diagnoses and treats
diseased trees;

• houses, feeds, exercises, trains and grooms
horses and dogs in preparation for entry to shows
and races;

1

• monitors and maintains the level of wildfowl on
public and private estates.

RELATED JOB TITLES

2

3

Fisherman
Gamekeeper
Greyhound trainer
Stable manager
Tree surgeon

4

5

6

7

8

9
174

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this sub-major group shape and join metal, erect and maintain metal structures
and fixtures, set up and operate metal working machinery, install and repair industrial
plant and machinery, assemble parts in the manufacture of metal goods, make and calibrate
precision instruments, maintain and repair motor vehicles, and install, test and repair
industrial, domestic and commercial electrical/electronic equipment.

MINOR GROUP 521
METAL FORMING, WELDING AND RELATED TRADES

Major Group 5

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 52
SKILLED METAL AND ELECTRICAL TRADES

1

Metal forming, welding and related trades workers shape, cast, finish and join metal, and
erect, install, maintain and repair metal structures and fixtures.

2

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
5211
5212
5213
5214
5215
5216

SMITHS AND FORGE WORKERS
MOULDERS, CORE MAKERS, DIE CASTERS
SHEET METAL WORKERS
METAL PLATE WORKERS, SHIPWRIGHTS, RIVETERS
WELDING TRADES
PIPE FITTERS

5211 SMITHS AND FORGE
WORKERS
Smiths and forge workers operate or direct the
operation of power hammers and presses to shape
heated metal to requirements and to make and repair
a variety of metal articles by heating, hammering
and bending.

3

4

TASKS

• heats or supervises the heating of metal to be

5

forged in furnace;

• positions or directs the positioning of heated
metal on anvil or other work surface;

• operates or directs operation of press or hammer
and repositions workpiece between strokes;

6

• holds special forging tools against workpiece to
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is usually via apprenticeships administered
by professional associations and last up to four years.
Apprenticeships incorporate technical training and
practical experience and lead to recognised awards
and membership of professional bodies.

shape and cut metal as required;

• bends or shapes metal by hand forging methods
using hammers, punches, drifts and other hand
tools;

7

• tempers and hardens forged pieces, as required,
by quenching in oil or water;

8

• fits and secures horses shoes.

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

175

Major Group 5

RELATED JOB TITLES

5213 SHEET METAL WORKERS

Blacksmith
Farrier
Forger
Hot brass stamper
Smith

Sheet metal workers mark out, cut, shape and join
sheet metal using hand or machine tools, to make
and repair sheet metal products and components
(excluding vehicle bodywork).

5212 MOULDERS, CORE MAKERS,
DIE CASTERS

1

Moulders, core makers and die casters make sand,
loam and plaster moulds and cores for casting metal
and pour or inject molten metal into dies by hand or
machine.

2

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

3

Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades or have
relevant practical experience. Training is by
apprenticeship including practical experience and
technical training. Modern Apprenticeships in
Engineering Material Processing at NVQ/SVQ Level
3 are available.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades.
Training is usually via apprenticeship including
practical experience and technical training. Modern
Apprenticeships in Engineering Materials
Processing, Engineering Assembly and Engineering
Construction are available at NVQ/SVQ Level 3.

TASKS

• examines drawings and specifications to assess
job requirements;

• uses template, measuring instruments and tools
to mark out layout lines and reference points;

• uses hand or machine tools to bend, roll, fold,
press or beat cut sheet metal;

4

TASKS

• assembles prepared parts and joins them by

• positions moulding frame over pattern, fills it
with sand, loam, or plaster and compacts by hand
or machine;

5

• transfers mould unit to oven for baking or hardens
by injecting carbon dioxide;

• separates mould from pattern and repairs

bolting, welding or soldering;

• finishes product by grinding, filing, cleaning and
polishing;

• repairs damaged metal parts such as copper
sheets and tubes by beating, riveting, soldering,
welding and fitting replacement parts.

damaged mould surfaces;

• applies refractory bonding solution to moulds and

6

dies to prevent molten metal fusing with sand;

• fits cores in mould to form hollow parts in
casting;

• prepares casting pit with vents to allow the escape

7

of gases, scoops molten metal from furnace using
ladle and pours it into die or die casting machine.

RELATED JOB TITLES

8

Coremaker (metal trades)
Die caster
Floor moulder
Moulder and coremaker (foundry)

9
176

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Coppersmith
Metal finisher
Panel beater (metal trades)
Sheet metal fabricator
Sheet metal worker

5214 METAL PLATE WORKERS,
SHIPWRIGHTS, RIVETERS
Metal plate workers, shipwrights and riveters mark
off, drill, shape, position, rivet and seal metal plates
and girders to form structures and frameworks.

Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades. Training
is usually via apprenticeship including practical
experience and technical training. Modern
Apprenticeships in Engineering Materials
Processing, Engineering Assembly and Engineering
Construction are available at NVQ/SVQ Level 3.

and technical training. NVQs/SVQs are available
at Levels 1, 2 and 3. Modern Apprenticeships are
available at NVQ/SVQ Level 3. To gain
employment, welders must pass a Welder Approval
Test to demonstrate the required skills.

Major Group 5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TASKS

• selects appropriate welding equipment such as
TASKS

• examines drawings and specifications and uses
rules, scribes and punches to mark out metal plate
with guidelines and reference points;

• cuts metal plate to markings using hand or
machine tools;

• uses machine tools to bend, curve, punch, drill
and straighten metal plate as required;

electric arc, gas torch, etc.;

• connects wires to power supply, or hoses to
oxygen, acetylene, argon, carbon dioxide, electric
arc, or other source and adjusts controls to
regulate gas pressure and rate of flow;

1

• guides electrode or torch along line of weld,
burns away damaged areas, and melts brazing
alloy or solder into joints;

2

• cleans and smoothes weld.

• uses hydraulic jacks to position and align metal
platework or frame for welding and bolting;

• selects suitable rivets and rivets together metal
plates and girders;

• seals seams with caulking compound, smoothes
welds, fixes metal doors, metal collars, portholes,
tank and hatch covers and performs other metal
plate finishing tasks using a variety of hand and
power tools.

3

RELATED JOB TITLES
Arc welder
Electric welder
Fitter-welder
Solderer (metal trades)
Spot welder
Welder

4

RELATED JOB TITLES

5216 PIPE FITTERS

Boilermaker
Caulker-burner
Plater-welder
Shipwright

Workers in this unit group install and repair pipes in
industrial and domestic premises.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5

6

5215 WELDING TRADES
Welding trades workers join metal parts by welding,
brazing and soldering, and cut and remove defects from
metal using a variety of equipment and techniques.

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
some employers may expect entrants to possess
GCSEs/S grades. Training is usually via
apprenticeship including practical experience and
technical training. NVQs/SVQs in Mechanical
Engineering Services (Plumbing) at Levels 2 and 3.

7

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
TASKS
Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades or an
appropriate GNVQ/GSVQ. Training is typically by
apprenticeship incorporating practical experience

• examines drawings and specifications to

8

determine layout of piping;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

177

Major Group 5

• measures and cuts required lengths of copper,
lead, steel, iron, aluminium or plastic piping
using hand or machine tools;

• installs pipes for heating, ventilating, fire
prevention, water and similar systems in
domestic, commercial and industrial properties;

• fits piping into position and joins sections by
welding, soldering, cementing, fusing, screwing
or by other methods;

1

• tests pipe work for leaks and makes necessary
adjustments.

RELATED JOB TITLES

2

Advanced pipe fitter
Pipe fitter

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
178

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Metal machining, fitting and instrument making trades workers mark out metal for machine
tool working, set up and operate lathes, boring, drilling, grinding, milling machines and
presses, assemble and repair machine tools, install and repair plant and industrial machinery,
fit and assemble parts and sub-assemblies in the manufacture of metal products and make,
calibrate, test and repair precision and optical instruments.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

Major Group 5

MINOR GROUP 522
METAL MACHINING, FITTING AND INSTRUMENT
MAKING TRADES

1

5221 METAL MACHINING SETTERS AND SETTER-OPERATORS
5222 TOOL MAKERS, TOOL FITTERS AND MARKERS-OUT
5223 METAL WORKING PRODUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
FITTERS
5224 PRECISION INSTRUMENT MAKERS AND REPAIRERS

2

3
5221 METAL MACHINING
SETTERS AND SETTER
OPERATORS
Workers in this unit group operate machines to drill,
bore, grind, cut, and mill or to otherwise shape metal
workpieces.

• operates automatic or manual controls to feed
tool to workpiece or vice versa and checks
accuracy of machining;

• repositions workpiece, changes tools and resets
machine as necessary during production run;

4

• instructs operators on the safe and correct method
of operation of the machine.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5
RELATED JOB TITLES

There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
Training is usually received on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs at Level 2 are available.

TASKS

Centre lathe turner
Machine setter (metal trades)
Machine tool setter
Setter (metal trades)
Setter-operator (metal trades)
Tool setter-operator

6

• examines drawings and specifications to
determine appropriate method, sequence of
operations and machine setting;

• selects and fixes work-holding devices and
appropriate cutting, shaping, grinding and/or
forming tools;

• sets machine controls for rotation speeds, depth
of cut and stroke, and adjusts machine table,
stops and guides;

7
5222 TOOL MAKERS, TOOL
FITTERS AND MARKERS-OUT
Tool makers, tool fitters and markers-out mark out
metal for machining and fit, assemble and repair
machine and press tools, dies, jigs, fixtures and other
tools.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

179

Major Group 5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
Training is usually received on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs
at Level 2 are available.

• examines drawings and specifications to
determine appropriate method and sequence of
operations;

• marks out reference points using measuring
instruments and tools such as punches, rules and
squares;

2

3

5

6

7

• fits and assembles parts and/or metal subassemblies to fine tolerances to make aircraft and
marine engines, prototype metal products,
agricultural machinery and machine tools;

• fits and assembles, other than to fine tolerances,

workpieces to specifications and checks accuracy
of machining;

• assembles prepared parts, checks their alignment

• examines operation of, and makes adjustments

with micrometers, optical projectors and other
measuring equipment and adjusts as necessary;

to, internal combustion and jet engines and motor
vehicles;

RELATED JOB TITLES
Die sinker (metal trades)
Jig and tool fitter
Marker-off (engineering)
Tool maker (metal trades)
Tool room fitter

5223 METAL WORKING
PRODUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE FITTERS
Metal working production and maintenance fitters
erect, install and repair electrical and mechanical
plant and industrial machinery, fit and assemble parts
and sub-assemblies in the manufacture of metal
products and test and adjust new motor vehicles and
engines.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8

determine appropriate methods and sequence of
operations;

prepared parts and sub-assemblies to make motor
vehicles, printing and agricultural machinery,
orthopaedic appliances and other metal goods;

• operates hand and machine tools to shape

• repairs damaged or worn tools.

4

TASKS

• examines drawings and specifications to

TASKS

1

NVQ/SVQ Level 3 are available. NVQs/SVQs in
Aircraft Engineering Maintenance are available at
Level 3. Further professional qualifications are
required to become a licensed aircraft engineer.

Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades, a GNVQ/
GSVQ or a BTEC/SQA award. Modern
Apprenticeships in Engineering Maintenance at

9
180

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

• erects, installs, repairs and services plant and
industrial machinery, including railway stock,
textile machines, aircraft frames and engines,
coin operated machines, locks, sewing machines,
bicycles and gas and oil appliances.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Aircraft engineer
Aircraft fitter
Aircraft ground engineer
Bench fitter
Engineering fitter
Fitter and turner
Machine fitter
Maintenance fitter
Mechanic-fitter
Millwright
Plant fitter

5224 PRECISION INSTRUMENT
MAKERS AND REPAIRERS
Precision instrument makers and repairers make,
calibrate, test and repair precision and optical
instruments such as barometers, compasses, cameras,
calibrators, watches, clocks and chronometers.

Major Group 5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Some GCSEs/S grades qualifications may be
required. Training is usually via an apprenticeship
including work experience and practical and
technical training leading to recognised awards.

TASKS

• examines drawings or specifications to determine

1

appropriate methods, materials and sequence of
operation;

• marks out and machines aluminium, brass, steel
and plastics using machine tools such as grinders,
lathes and shapers;

2

• tests watches and clocks for repair to diagnose
faults and removes, repairs or replaces damaged
and worn parts;

• tests completed timepiece for accuracy using

3

electronic or other test equipment;

• carries out service tasks such as cleaning, oiling
and regulating;

• checks prepared parts for accuracy using
measuring equipment, assembles parts and
adjusts as necessary using hand and machine
tools;

4

• positions, aligns and secures optical lenses in
mounts;

5

• tests, adjusts and repairs precision and optical
instruments.

RELATED JOB TITLES

6

Clockmaker
Horologist
Instrument maker
Instrument mechanic
Optical technician
Precision engineer
Watch and clock repairer
Watchmaker

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

181

Major Group 5

MINOR GROUP 523
VEHICLE TRADES
Vehicle trades workers repair, service and maintain the bodies, engines, parts, subassemblies, internal trimmings, upholstery and exterior surfaces of vehicles.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
5231
5232
5233
5234

1

2

3

4

5

6

MOTOR MECHANICS, AUTO ENGINEERS
VEHICLE BODY BUILDERS AND REPAIRERS
AUTO ELECTRICIANS
VEHICLE SPRAY PAINTERS

5231 MOTOR MECHANICS, AUTO
ENGINEERS
Motor mechanics and auto engineers accept calls
for help and repair and service the mechanical parts
of cars, lorries, buses, motorcycles and other motor
vehicles.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades or an equivalent qualification. Training is
undertaken off- and on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs at
Levels 2 and 3 are available.
Modern
Apprenticeships at NVQ/SVQ Level 3 are available
and take three to four years to complete.

• carries out routine maintenance checks on oil and
air filters, brakes and other vehicle parts/systems.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Car mechanic
Diesel fitter
Garage mechanic
Motor fitter
Motor mechanic
Motor vehicle technician
Motorcycle mechanic
Vehicle mechanic
Vehicle patrolman/woman

5232 VEHICLE BODY BUILDERS
AND REPAIRERS
Workers in this unit group construct and repair the
bodies of road vehicles, railway coaches and aircraft,
and fit interior and exterior fittings to vehicle bodies.

TASKS

• may drive to site of breakdown and visually
checks, test drives or uses test equipment to
diagnose engine and mechanical faults;

7

• removes, dismantles and checks the appropriate
parts, systems or entire engine;

• repairs and replaces defective parts;
• prepares new parts using hand and machine tools;

8

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• reassembles, tests, adjusts and tunes the
appropriate parts, systems or entire engine;

9
182

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

There are no formal academic entry requirements
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades or an equivalent qualification. Off- and onthe-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs at Levels
2 and 3 are available. Modern Apprenticeships at
NVQ/SVQ Level 3 are also available and take
between three to four years to complete.

TASKS

• diagnoses job requirements or ascertains work

• uses portable and bench test equipment to

specifications from drawings or instructions;

diagnose faults in electrical/electronic circuitry;

• selects, cuts, shapes and assembles materials to

• removes faulty components and fits replacements

form parts of vehicle underframe, framework and
body;

using hand tools and by simple brazing/
soldering;

• repairs damage to chassis and engine mountings

• makes new parts using hand and machine tools;

using hydraulic rams, jacks and jigs;

• hammers out dents in bodywork, fills in small
depressions or corroded areas in solder, plastic
or other filler compound and replaces body
panels using hand and power tools;

Major Group 5

TASKS

• checks condition of electrical/electronic systems
and carries out servicing tasks;

• installs additional electrical amenities such as

1

radio/cassette players, aerials and radio
suppressers.

• installs and repairs interior fittings including
seats, seatbelts and fascia in cars, sinks and
special features in caravans, mobile shops and
bulkheads in aircraft;

• positions, secures and repairs external fittings
including windows, doors, door handles, catches
and roof attachments.

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Auto electrician
Automobile electrician

3

RELATED JOB TITLES

5234 VEHICLE SPRAY PAINTERS

Body builder (vehicles)
Body maker (vehicles)
Coach builder
Coach finisher
Panel beater (vehicle repair)
Vehicle body repairer
Vehicle builder

Vehicle spray painters use spray equipment to apply
paint, cellulose and other protective or decorative
materials to the bodywork of motor vehicles, railway
coaches and aircraft.

4

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5

5233 AUTO ELECTRICIANS

There are no formal academic entry requirements
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades or an equivalent qualification. Off- and onthe-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs at Levels
2 and 3 are available. Modern Apprenticeships at
NVQ/SVQ Level 3 are also available and take
between three to four years to complete.

Auto electricians repair and service the electrical/
electronic circuitry and components of cars, lorries,
buses, motorcycles and other motor vehicles.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

7

TASKS
There are no formal academic entry requirements
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades or an equivalent qualification. Off- and onthe-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs at Levels
2 and 3 are available. Modern Apprenticeships at
NVQ/SVQ Level 3 are also available and take
between three to four years to complete.

6

• applies masking material to protect areas not to
be coated and removes any external fixtures;

• consults vehicle colour code, chooses
appropriate paint or mixes paint to achieve
desired consistency and colour;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

183

Major Group 5

• uses hand or electrostatic spray gun to coat
surfaces, adjusting nozzle and pressure valves
of the gun as required;

• removes masking materials and refits external
fittings after completion of spraying;

• cleans and maintains spray equipment, protective
clothing and spraying booth.

RELATED JOB TITLES

1

Car paint sprayer
Coach painter
Vehicle refinisher

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
184

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in electrical trades install wiring in road and rail vehicles and aircraft and assemble,
install, maintain, test and repair electrical and electronic equipment, components and systems
concerned with lighting, signalling, telecommunications, radio and television, computing
and other commercial, industrial and domestic functions.

Major Group 5

MINOR GROUP 524
ELECTRICAL TRADES

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
5241
5242
5243
5244
5245
5249

ELECTRICIANS, ELECTRICAL FITTERS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ENGINEERS
LINES REPAIRERS AND CABLE JOINTERS
TV, VIDEO AND AUDIO ENGINEERS
COMPUTER ENGINEERS, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE
ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS NEC

5241 ELECTRICIANS,
ELECTRICAL FITTERS
Electricians and electrical fitters assemble parts in
the manufacture of electrical and electronic
equipment, and install, maintain, and repair electrical
plant, machinery, appliances and wiring.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Academic qualifications may not be required, though
some GCSEs/S grades or an equivalent qualification
may be an advantage. NVQs/SVQs in Servicing
Electronic Systems are available at Levels 1, 2 and
3. Modern Apprenticeships combining practical
work experience and technical training are available
at Levels 2 and 3. Entrants must have good eyesight
and normal colour vision.

1

2

3

• cuts, bends and installs electrical conduit;
• assembles parts and sub-assemblies using hand
tools and by brazing, riveting or welding;

• installs electrical plant, machinery and other
electrical fixtures and appliances such as fuse
boxes, generators, light sockets etc.;

4

• examines electrical plant or machinery, domestic
appliances and other electrical assembly for
faults using test equipment and replaces worn
parts and faulty wiring.

5

RELATED JOB TITLES

6

Electrical contractor
Electrical engineer
Electrical fitter
Electrician
Maintenance electrician

TASKS

7

• examines drawings, specifications and wiring
diagrams to determine the method and sequence
of operations;

• selects, cuts and lays wires and connects to
sockets, plugs or terminals by crimping,
soldering, brazing or bolting;

5242 TELECOMMUNICATIONS
ENGINEERS
Telecommunications engineers install, maintain and
repair public and private telephone systems.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

185

Major Group 5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TASKS

• assists with the erection of wood poles or steel
There are no formal academic requirements,
although entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades
or an equivalent qualification.
Modern
Apprenticeships and National Traineeships
combining work experience and practical training
are available at NVQ/SVQ Levels 2 and 3.

towers to carry overhead lines;

• removes protective sheath from cables, joins
conductor wires by brazing, soldering or
crimping and applies conductor insulation and
protective coverings;

• connects and installs transformers, fuse gear,
lightning arrestors, aircraft warning lights, cable
boxes and other equipment;

TASKS

1

2

• installs internal cabling and wiring for telephone
systems and fits and wires junction and
distribution boxes;

• connects cables to test equipment and tests for

• fixes connecting wires from underground and

• locates and repairs faults to lines and ancillary

aerial lines to premises and connects cable
terminals to inside wiring;

balance, resistance, insulation and any defects;
equipment.

• installs telephones, switchboards and coin
operated phone boxes;

• uses testing equipment to locate defective

3

components of circuitry and makes any necessary
repairs;

RELATED JOB TITLES
Cable jointer
Cable repairer (electric)
Overhead linesman

• tests installation and makes any further necessary
adjustments.

4

5

6

7

RELATED JOB TITLES
Technical officer (telecommunications)
Telecom engineer
Telecommunications engineer
Telephone engineer
Telephone installation engineer
Telephone technician

5243 LINES REPAIRERS AND
CABLE JOINTERS
Lines repairers and cable jointers install, maintain,
test and repair overhead, underground, surface and
submarine electricity and telecommunications
cables.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs are available at Levels 2 and 3.

9
186

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

5244 TV, VIDEO AND AUDIO
ENGINEERS
TV, video and audio engineers service and repair
domestic television, video and audio appliances.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades or an
equivalent qualification such as an Intermediate
GNVQ/GSVQ Level II. Training is provided onand off-the-job and may be supplemented by short
courses delivered by manufacturers. NVQs/SVQs
in Domestic Appliance Engineering are available at
Level 3.

TASKS

• examines equipment and observes reception to
determine nature of defect;

• uses electronic testing equipment to diagnose
faults and check voltages and resistance;

faulty components or wiring;

• re-assembles equipment, tests for correct
functioning and makes any necessary further
adjustments;

• carries out service tasks such as cleaning and
insulation testing according to schedule.

• places prepared parts and sub-assemblies in
position, checks alignment and secures with hand
tools;

• carries out preventative servicing tasks, monitors
the operation of computer equipment, and
advises on hardware requirements and
acquisition.

RELATED JOB TITLES

RELATED JOB TITLES

Radio and television engineer
Service engineer (radio and television)
Television engineer
Television service engineer
Video engineer (service and repair)

Computer engineer
Computer maintenance engineer
Computer service engineer
Computer service technician

Major Group 5

• dismantles equipment and repairs or replaces

1

2
5245 COMPUTER ENGINEERS,
INSTALLATION AND
MAINTENANCE
Computer engineers install, maintain and repair
personal computers, mainframe and other computer
hardware.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible with a variety of academic
qualifications and/or relevant experience. Entrants
typically possess GCSEs/S grades and A levels/H
grades, BTEC/SQA awards, an Advanced GNVQ/
GSVQ Level III or a degree. Training is usually
provided on-the-job supplemented by specialised
courses.
Postgraduate and professional
qualifications, and NVQs/SVQs at Levels 2 and 3
are available.

5249 ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONICS
ENGINEERS NEC
Workers in this group perform a variety of electrical
and electronic occupations not elsewhere classified
in MINOR GROUP 524: Electrical Trades.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

4

There are no formal academic requirements although
entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades. Training
is usually by apprenticeship and combines practical
work experience and technical training. NVQs/
SVQs in Servicing Electronic Systems are available
at Levels 2 and 3. Manufacturers may run specialised
courses related to their products.

• maintains documentation to track and log system
components and identify system upgrades,
enhancements and conversions of infrastructure;

• examines drawings, wiring diagrams and
specifications to determine appropriate methods
and sequence of operations;

• places prepared parts and sub-assemblies in

diagrams to determine appropriate method and
sequence of operations;

position, checks their alignment and secures with
hand tools to install x-ray and medical equipment,
aircraft instruments and other electronic
equipment not elsewhere classified;

• installs and maintains hardware incorporating

• connects wire or cable to specified terminals or

PCs and mainframe, and installs optical fibre,
copper cable and other appropriate links;

connectors by crimping, brazing, bolting or
soldering;

• examines drawings, specifications and wiring

5

6

TASKS
TASKS

3

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

187

Major Group 5

• examines for defect and repairs, x-ray equipment,

1

• tests for correct functioning and makes any

aircraft and ground control electronic equipment,
teleprinters, accounting machines, dictating
machines, electronic test equipment, railway
electrical signalling equipment, sound and
television transmission equipment, radar
equipment, microwave ovens, metal detectors,
medical equipment, office equipment such as
printers, photocopiers and fax machines, and
other electronic and related equipment not
elsewhere classified;
further necessary adjustments;

• performs routine servicing tasks, such as cleaning
and insulation testing.

2

3

RELATED JOB TITLES
Alarm engineer
Customer engineer (office machinery)
Electronic engineer (maintenance)
Office machinery mechanic
Service engineer
Signal technician (railways)

4

5

6

7

8

9
188

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Skilled construction and building trades lay stone, brick and similar materials, construct
and repair roofs, install heating, plumbing and ventilating systems, fit windows, doors and
other fixtures, and apply coverings and decorative material to walls, floors and ceilings.

Major Group 5

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 53
SKILLED CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING TRADES

MINOR GROUP 531
CONSTRUCTION TRADES
Workers within construction trades erect and fit metal framework for building construction,
cut, shape and lay stone, brick and similar materials, cover roofs and exterior walls, install,
maintain and repair plumbing, heating and ventilating systems, construct and install wooden
frameworks and fittings, fit glass into windows and doors, and perform other miscellaneous
construction tasks.

1

2

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
5311
5312
5313
5314
5315
5316
5319

STEEL ERECTORS
BRICKLAYERS, MASONS
ROOFERS, ROOF TILERS AND SLATERS
PLUMBERS, HEATING AND VENTILATING ENGINEERS
CARPENTERS AND JOINERS
GLAZIERS, WINDOW FABRICATORS AND FITTERS
CONSTRUCTION TRADES NEC

3

4

5

5311 STEEL ERECTORS

TASKS

Steel erectors fit and erect structural metal
framework for buildings and other structures such
as chimneys.

• examines drawings and specifications to assess
job requirements;

• erects ladders, scaffolding or working cage;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
National Traineeship approved by the Construction
Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
General Construction at Level 3.

6

• directs hoisting and positioning of girders and
other metal parts and checks alignment;

• arranges for or undertakes bolting and welding
of metal parts;

7

• checks alignment of metal parts using spirit
level and plumb-rule.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

189

Major Group 5

1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Steel erector
Steel fabricator
Structural erector

5312 BRICKLAYERS, MASONS
Bricklayers and masons erect and repair structures
of stone, brick and similar materials and cut, shape
and polish granite, marble, slate and other stone for
building, ornamental and other purposes.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
National Traineeship approved by the Construction
Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ
in General Construction at Level 3.

TASKS

• measures roof or exterior wall and calculates
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

required amounts of underfelt, tiles, slates or
thatching material;

• cuts wooden battens, felt and underfelt to

2

3

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
National Traineeship approved by the Construction
Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
General Construction at Level 3.

required size;

• lays and secures underfelt and covers with hot
bitumen or other adhesive compound;

• lays, aligns and secures successive overlapping
layers of roofing material;

• seals edges of roof with mortar and ensures that

TASKS

joints are watertight.

• examines drawings, photographs and
specifications to determine job requirements;

4

hand or pneumatic chisels;

• spreads mortar on foundations and bricks, and
places, levels and aligns bricks in mortar bed;

5

RELATED JOB TITLES

• marks and cuts stone using hammers, mallet and

• uses hand and power tools to shape, trim, carve,
cut letters in and polish stone;

• levels, aligns and embeds stone in mortar and
faces brick, concrete or steel frame with stone to
make and repair structures.

6

Felt roofer
Roof sheeter
Roof tiler
Roofer
Roofing contractor
Slater
Slater and tiler
Thatcher

5314 PLUMBERS, HEATING AND
VENTILATING ENGINEERS

RELATED JOB TITLES

7

8

Bricklayer
Mason
Monumental mason
Stone mason

Workers in this unit group assemble, install, maintain
and repair plumbing fixtures, heating and ventilating
systems and pipes and pipeline systems in
commercial, residential and industrial
establishments.

5313 ROOFERS, ROOF TILERS AND
SLATERS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Workers in this unit group cover roofs and exterior
walls with felting, sheeting, slates, tiles and thatch
to provide a waterproof surface.

There are no formal academic requirements although
GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. NVQs/SVQs
in Mechanical Engineering Services are available

9
190

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

TASKS

• examines drawings and specifications to
determine job requirements;

TASKS

• examines drawings and specifications to
determine layout of system;

• measures and cuts required lengths of copper,
lead, steel, iron, aluminium or plastic using hand
or machine tools;

• installs fittings such as storage tanks, cookers,
baths, toilets, taps and valves, refrigerators,
boilers, radiators and fires;

• tests completed installation for leaks and makes

• selects and measures appropriate wood and cuts,
shapes and drills to specification using saws,
planes, chisels and other power or hand tools;

• aligns and fixes prepared wood pieces by
screwing, nailing, gluing and dowelling to form
frames, shop fronts, counter units, decking,
theatrical sets, furniture, small wooden craft,
scale models and wooden templates;

soldering, cementing, fusing, screwing or other
methods;

• repairs burst pipes and mechanical and
combustion faults and replaces faulty taps,
washers, valves, etc.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Air conditioning engineer
Gas service engineer
Heating engineer
Plumber
Plumbing and heating engineer

5315 CARPENTERS AND JOINERS
Carpenters and joiners construct, erect, install and
repair wooden structures and fittings used in internal
and external frameworks and cut, shape, fit and
assemble wood to make templates, jigs, scale models
and scenic equipment for theatres.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
National Traineeship approved by the Construction
Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
General Construction at Level 3.

1

• checks accuracy of work with square, rule and
spirit level;

• maintains and repairs woodwork and fittings.

any necessary adjustments;

• attaches fittings and joins piping by welding,

Major Group 5

at Levels 2 and 3. Modern Apprenticeships are
available for plumbing and lead to an NVQ/SVQ at
Level 3.

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Boat builder
Builder's joiner
Carpenter
Carpenter and joiner
Shop fitter

3

5316 GLAZIERS, WINDOW
FABRICATORS AND FITTERS
Workers in this unit group install pre-glazed wooden,
metal or PVC framework, and cut, fit and set glass
in windows, doors, shop fronts, and other structural
frames.

4

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Entry is typically through a Modern Apprenticeship
in Glazing Installation or Installing Architectural
Glazing Systems leading to an NVQ/SVQ at Level 3.

6

7
TASKS

• examines drawings or specifications to determine
job requirements;

• scores plain, coloured, safety and ornamental

8

glass with hand cutter and breaks off glass by
hand or with pliers;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

191

Major Group 5

• smoothes edges of glass and positions and secures
in frame or grooved lead strips;

• applies mastic, putty or adhesive between glass
• fixes mirror panels to interior and exterior walls

Double glazing installer
Glass fitter
Glazier
Leaded light maker
Window fabricator
Window fitter

5319 CONSTRUCTION TRADES
NEC

3

Workers in this unit group undertake a variety of tasks
in the construction, alteration, maintenance and repair
of buildings, steeples, industrial chimneys and other
tall structures.

4

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
National Traineeship approved by the Construction
Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
General Construction at Level 3.

6

TASKS

• selects, measures and cuts steel bars, rods and
wire to required lengths, positions and fixes
reinforcements into position and tensions as
required using hydraulic jacks;

• lays bricks, tiles and building blocks to construct,
repair and decorate buildings;

• pours and levels concrete, prepares surfaces for

8

RELATED JOB TITLES

and repairs and replaces broken glass.

2

7

chimneys and other high structures, and installs
and replaces lightning conductors.

and frame and trims off excess with knife;

RELATED JOB TITLES

1

• maintains and repairs steeples, industrial

painting and plastering, and mixes and applies
plaster and paint;

• installs plumbing fixtures, woodwork structures
and fittings, and sets glass in frames;

9
192

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Builder (building and contracting)
Builder and decorator
Building contractor
General builder
Steel fixer
Steeplejack

Workers in this minor group apply plaster and cement mixtures to walls and ceilings, lay
flooring covers and apply paint, varnish, wallpaper, tiles and other protective and decorative
materials to walls and ceilings.

Major Group 5

MINOR GROUP 532
BUILDING TRADES

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
5321 PLASTERERS
5322 FLOORERS AND WALL TILERS
5323 PAINTERS AND DECORATORS

1

5321 PLASTERERS

RELATED JOB TITLES

Plasterers apply plaster and cement mixtures to walls
and ceilings, fix fibrous sheets and cast and fix
ornamental plasterwork to the interior or exterior of
buildings.

Plasterer
Plastering contractor

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
National Traineeship approved by the Construction
Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
General Construction at Level 3.

TASKS

• mixes, or directs the mixing of, plaster to desired
consistency;

• applies and smoothes one or more coats of plaster
and produces a finished surface, using hand tools
or mechanical spray;

2

3

5322 FLOORERS AND WALL
TILERS
Workers in this unit group lay composition mixtures
(other than mastic asphalt) to form flooring, plan,
fit and secure carpet, underlay and linoleum and
cover and decorate walls and floors with terrazzo
and granolithic mixtures, tiles and mosaic panels.

4

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
National Traineeship approved by the Construction
Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
General Construction at Level 3.

6

TASKS

7

• pours liquid plaster into mould to cast ornamental
plaster work;

• measures, cuts, installs and secures plaster board
and/or ornamental plasterwork to walls and
ceilings;

• covers and seals joints between boards and
finishes surface;

• checks surface level using line, spirit level and
straight edge.

• examines drawings and specifications to
determine job requirements;

• cleans floor surface, fixes wooden laying guides
and mixes, pours and levels granite and terrazzo
mixtures, bitumen, synthetic resin or other
composition mixtures to form flooring;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

193

Major Group 5

• examines premises to plan suitable layout and

• mixes adhesive or removes self-adhesive backing

cuts, lays and secures underlay, carpet and
linoleum;

and positions covering material on wall,
matching up patterns where appropriate and
removing wrinkles and air bubbles by hand or
brush;

• finishes covering by rolling, smoothing, grouting
or polishing;

• mixes cement screed or other adhesive, cuts and
positions floor and wall tiles and checks
alignment of tiling with spirit level.

• sketches outline of lettering or design onto
surface and paints, or presses gold or similar leaf
onto adhesive, as required to reproduce design;

• stains, waxes and french polishes wood surfaces
by hand.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

RELATED JOB TITLES
Carpet fitter
Carpet planner
Floor layer
Floor tiler
Tile fixer
Wall tiler

5323 PAINTERS AND
DECORATORS
Workers in this unit group apply paint, varnish,
wallpaper and other protective and decorative
materials to interior and exterior walls and surfaces,
make signs and showcards, paint designs and
lettering on wood, glass, metal, plastics and other
materials and stain, wax and french polish wood
surfaces by hand.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though GCSEs/S grades are advantageous. Entry is
typically through a Modern Apprenticeship or
National Traineeship approved by the Construction
Industry Training Board leading to an NVQ/SVQ in
General Construction at Level 3.

TASKS

• erects working platform or scaffolding up to five
metres in height;

• prepares surfaces by cleaning, sanding and filling

8

cracks and holes with appropriate filler;

• applies primer, undercoat and finishing coat(s)
using brush, roller, or spray equipment;

9
194

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Decorator
French polisher
House painter
Painter
Painter and decorator
Sign writer

Workers in this sub-major group weave fabrics, make articles of clothing, soft furnishings
and leather goods, upholster vehicle interiors, set and operate printing machines, prepare
meat, poultry and fish, bake bread and flour based confectionery products, and prepare
food within hotels, restaurants and other establishments, and perform a variety of other
skilled trades not elsewhere classified.

MINOR GROUP 541
TEXTILES AND GARMENTS TRADES

Major Group 5

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 54
TEXTILES, PRINTING AND OTHER SKILLED TRADES

1

Workers within textiles and garments trades weave fabrics into fibre and carpet, knit garments
from yarn, upholster the seating and interior of vehicles and planes, make soft furnishings,
make, repair and finish leather goods, and make, fit and alter tailored articles of clothing.

2

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
5411
5412
5413
5414
5419

WEAVERS AND KNITTERS
UPHOLSTERERS
LEATHER AND RELATED TRADES
TAILORS AND DRESSMAKERS
TEXTILES, GARMENTS AND RELATED TRADES NEC

3

4
5411 WEAVERS AND KNITTERS
Weavers and knitters set up and operate hand and
power operated looms and machines to weave fabrics
into fibre and carpet or to knit garments and other
articles from yarn.

• sets controls to produce article of specified size
and pattern;

• places fibre and yarn packages on machine and

5

draws them through appropriate guides and
tensioners;

• monitors machine operation to detect broken
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades or an
appropriate BTEC/SQA award. Training is usually
provided on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in Manufacturing
Textiles are available at Levels 1, 2 and 3 and in
Products from Textiles at Levels 1 and 2.

threads of yarn, the evenness of warp tension
and the quality of output;

• removes completed garments and lengths of
fabric from machine;

• cleans and oils machine and reports any
mechanical faults.

TASKS

RELATED JOB TITLES

• prepares machine for operation by setting input

Carpet weaver
Knitter
Net maker
Textile weaver
Weaver

packages, feeding thread, fibre or yarn through
guides, rollers, tensioners and conditioning
devices, and securing to output packages, spools
or cards;

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

195

Major Group 5

1

5412 UPHOLSTERERS
Workers in this unit group upholster vehicle, aircraft
and other seating, fix trimmings to the interiors of
vehicles and aircraft and make mattresses, curtains
and other soft furniture.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
Training is provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Upholstered Furniture Production is
available at Level 2.

There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
Training is mainly on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs are
available in some areas.

TASKS

TASKS

• measures frame to be covered or examines

• uses hand tools or machine to cut out, trim, punch

drawings or other specifications and cuts material
with shears, knife or scissors;

holes in or stitch guide lines on leather or leather
substitute component parts;

• tacks and staples or otherwise secures webbing

• positions leather and rubber footwear component

to furniture frame;

• pads springs and secures padding by stitching,

4

5

stapling, tacking, etc.;

parts on lasts and shapes and joins uppers to
insoles and soles;

• uses hand tools or machine to make up and repair

• pins sections of coverings together, joins by

saddles, harnesses, belts, straps and other leather
products;

sewing and inserts trims, braids and buttons as
required;

• uses hand and machine tools to sew and stitch

• operates machine to compress padded spring

leather in the making and decoration of footwear
and leather goods other than garments;

assemblies and inserts them into mattress covers;

• encases bed springs and padding with selected
covering material by hand or machine stitching
and fits castors where required;

6

Workers in this unit group make and repair shoes,
cut out, make up, sew, decorate and finish leather
and leather substitute goods other than garments.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

2

3

5413 LEATHER AND RELATED
TRADES

• fits upholstery unit to frame or replaces covering,

• prepares paper or paperboard master patterns of
component parts of footwear;

• waxes, cleans and finishes footwear and other
leather goods.

padding, webbing or springs to repair upholstered
furniture.
RELATED JOB TITLES

7

RELATED JOB TITLES

8

Coach trimmer
Curtain maker
Interior sprung mattress maker
Upholsterer

9
196

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Clicker (footwear mfr)
Cobbler
Laster
Saddler
Shoe maker
Shoe repairer

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Tailors and dressmakers prepare patterns and make,
fit and alter tailored garments, dresses and other
articles of light clothing.

Entry may not depend on academic qualifications.
Training is mainly on-the-job.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades. A Modern Apprenticeship in Handicraft
Tailoring is available leading to an NVQ/SVQ at
Level 3.

Major Group 5

5414 TAILORS AND
DRESSMAKERS

TASKS

• marks out, cuts and sews corsets, light clothing
and hoods and aprons and makes and repairs
sails, boat covers and other canvas goods;

• fills and stuffs cushions, quilts, soft toys and

1

furniture;

• examines sketches and draws out patterns for the
manufacture of garments and upholstery;
TASKS

• takes customer's measurements and discusses
required style and material;

• prepares individual or adapts stock pattern;
• arranges pattern on correct grain of fabric, in
most economical layout, marks position and cuts
out garment parts with shears;

• pins garment on customer or dummy model and

• shapes and steams fabric into hats or hoods and
gives final shape to fibre helmets and felt hats;

• performs other tasks not elsewhere classified, for
example, forms mounts for wigs, makes powder
puffs and buttons, shapes hat brims, and staples
seams of industrial gloves.

makes buttonholes and sews on fasteners and
trimmings;

3

RELATED JOB TITLES

makes any necessary alterations;

• sews garment parts together by hand or machine,

2

4

Corsetiere
Cushion filler
Hat blocker
Sailmaker

• shapes garment by pressing seams, pleats, etc.;

5

• determines any necessary alterations and
removes or inserts stitching, lengthens or shortens
garment parts and adjusts seams, darts, etc. as
required.

6

RELATED JOB TITLES
Alteration hand
Dressmaker
Milliner
Tailoress

7

5419 TEXTILES, GARMENTS AND
RELATED TRADES NEC

8

Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
textiles and related craft occupations not elsewhere
classified in MINOR GROUP 541: Textiles and
Garments Trades.

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

197

Major Group 5

MINOR GROUP 542
PRINTING TRADES
Printing and related trades workers compose and set type and printing blocks, produce
printing plates, cylinders and film, operate printing machines and bind the finished printed
product.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
5421
5422
5423
5424

1

2

3

ORIGINATORS, COMPOSITORS AND PRINT PREPARERS
PRINTERS
BOOKBINDERS AND PRINT FINISHERS
SCREEN PRINTERS

5421 ORIGINATORS,
COMPOSITORS AND PRINT
PREPARERS
Originators, compositors and print preparers prepare
printing layouts, make printing plates from moulds,
set out photographed material, transfer film images
to plates or cylinders and lay out printing copy to be
photographed.

• examines proof copies and makes any necessary
alterations to type;

• processes filmsetting or desktop publishing
output to produce image on film or sensitised
paper;

• treats plates and cylinders with ultraviolet light
and chemicals to produce film positives;

• arranges and pastes printing material onto paper

4

ready for photographing.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
RELATED JOB TITLES

5

6

There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
Training is typically received on-the-job. National
Traineeships and Modern Apprenticeships in
Origination are available at NVQ/SVQ Levels 2 and
3 respectively.

TASKS

• lays sheet of plastic, rubber, wax or pulp board
on former and passes under hydraulic press to
form mould;

7

• determines from specification the kind and size
of type to be used and prepares page layout, and
operates keyboard of perforating, composing, or
filmsetting machine;

8

Compositor
Lithographic planner
Lithographic plate maker
Paste-up artist
Stereotyper
Type setter

5422 PRINTERS
Printers operate printing presses, prepare printing
plates and compose and assemble type and printing
blocks.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• inputs original copy into computer and
manipulates text, illustrations and layout using
desktop publishing software to produce desired
image;

9
198

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
Training is typically received on-the-job. National

• trims head, tail and fore-edge of book and gilds
and marbles page edges as necessary;

• cuts board and cloth for book cover and spine;
• embosses lettering or decoration on cover by hand

TASKS

• examine customer's requirements to determine

or machine;

Major Group 5

Traineeships and Modern Apprenticeships in
Machine Printing are available at NVQ/SVQ Levels
2 and 3 respectively.

• repairs worn bookbindings.

appropriate format and kind and size of type;

• prepares composed type or printing plate
according to type of press used;

• positions form or plate on machine, sets press
and prints proof copies;

• examines proof copies and adjusts press as
necessary;

RELATED JOB TITLES

1

Binder's assistant
Bookbinder
Collator (printing)
Darkroom technician
Print finisher

2

• starts or directs start of printing run and ensures
that printing proceeds smoothly.

RELATED JOB TITLES
General printer
Master printer
Printer

5424 SCREEN PRINTERS
Screen printers set and operate screen printing
machines and print lettering and designs on metal,
glass, plastics, paper and other materials by hand or
machine.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5423 BOOKBINDERS AND PRINT
FINISHERS
Bookbinders and print finishers bind and/or finish
printed products by hand or machine.

3

4

There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
Training is typically received on-the-job. National
Traineeships and Modern Apprenticeships in
Machine Printing are available at NVQ/SVQ Levels
2 and 3 respectively.

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
TASKS
There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
Training is typically received on-the-job. National
Traineeships and Modern Apprenticeships in
Machine Printing are available at NVQ/SVQ Levels
2 and 3 respectively.

• positions item for printing against guide marks

6

on work bench;

• pours colour into machine or directly onto screen
and positions screen over item;

• operates squeegee by hand or machine to press

7

colour through screen;
TASKS

• folds, collates and sews printed sheets by hand
or machine;

• compresses sewn book in nipping machine to
expel air and reduce swelling caused by sewing;

• dips wooden pattern block into colour tray and
lays different colours on top of, and adjacent to,
others to form the required pattern;

8

• examines screen print during run and makes any
necessary adjustments.

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

199

Major Group 5

RELATED JOB TITLES
Block printer
Screen printer
Silk screen printer

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
200

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in food preparation trades slaughter livestock, cut, trim and prepare meat, poultry
and fish and prepare, bake and finish bread and flour confectionery products, and prepares,
seasons and cooks food in hotels, restaurants and other establishments.

Major Group 5

MINOR GROUP 543
FOOD PREPARATION TRADES

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
5431
5432
5433
5434

BUTCHERS, MEAT CUTTERS
BAKERS, FLOUR CONFECTIONERS
FISHMONGERS, POULTRY DRESSERS
CHEFS, COOKS

1

5431 BUTCHERS, MEAT CUTTERS

RELATED JOB TITLES

2

Butchers and meat cutters direct and undertake the
slaughter of animals and prepare carcasses for
storage, processing and sale.

Butcher
Butcher's cutter
Meat cutter
Slaughterer

3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
Training is typically by apprenticeship. National
Traineeships leading to NVQ Level 2 in Meat
Processing are available. SVQs are available at
Levels 1, 2 and 3. Professional qualifications are
also available.

TASKS

• slaughters animal and removes skin, hide, hairs,
internal organs, etc.;

• cuts or saws carcasses into manageable

5432 BAKERS, FLOUR
CONFECTIONERS
Bakers and flour confectioners prepare and bake
dough, pastry and cake mixtures and make and finish
flour confectioners' products by hand.

4

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job or by
apprenticeship. Modern Apprenticeships and
National Traineeships leading to NVQs/SVQs at
Levels 2 and 3 are available.

6

proportions;

• removes bones, gristle, surplus fat, rind and other
waste material;

• cuts carcass parts into chops, joints, steaks, etc.
for sale;

• prepares meat for curing or other processing;
cleans tools and work surfaces.

TASKS

• weighs flour and other ingredients according to

7

recipe;

• mixes ingredients using hand or machine and
adds water or other liquids to obtain the required
consistency;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

201

Major Group 5

• rolls, cuts, stretches, kneads and moulds mixture
to form bread, rolls, buns, cakes and pastry
shapes;

• allows dough to rise and fills and glazes pastry;
and toppings and sprinkles sugar and other
confections on products.

Baker
Baker and confectioner
Cake decorator
Confectioner (not retail trade)

2
5433 FISHMONGERS, POULTRY
DRESSERS

3

Chefs and cooks plan menus and prepare, season
and cook food in hotels, restaurants, clubs, private
households and other establishments.

• makes cake decorations, spreads icing, fillings

RELATED JOB TITLES

1

5434 CHEFS, COOKS

Fishmongers and poultry dressers clean, cut and
prepare poultry carcasses and fish for processing or
sale.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic requirements.
Training is provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Food Preparation and Cooking are available
at Levels 1, 2 and 3. Modern Apprenticeships
leading to an NVQ/SVQ at Level 3 are also available.
Courses are also run by private cookery schools.

TASKS

• requisitions or purchases and examines
foodstuffs to ensure quality;

• plans meals, prepares, seasons and cooks
foodstuffs;

• plans and co-ordinates kitchen work such as

4

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Academic qualifications may not be required.
Training is typically provided on-the-job.

RELATED JOB TITLES

TASKS

Caterer
Chef
Cook
Cook in charge
Head cook

• removes feathers and internal organs, extracts
edible offal and cuts off feet and head from
poultry carcass as required;

6

• scrubs, heads, guts, washes and bones fish;
• cuts and slits fish for curing by hand or machine;
• cleans tools and work surfaces.

7
RELATED JOB TITLES

8

fetching, clearing and cleaning of equipment and
utensils.

Filleter (fish)
Fishmonger
Poultry dresser

9
202

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this unit group perform a `variety of craft and related trades not elsewhere
classified in MAJOR GROUP 5: Skilled Trades Occupations.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
5491 GLASS AND CERAMICS MAKERS, DECORATORS AND
FINISHERS
5492 FURNITURE MAKERS, OTHER CRAFT WOODWORKERS
5493 PATTERN MAKERS (MOULDS)
5494 MUSICAL INSTRUMENT MAKERS AND TUNERS
5495 GOLDSMITHS, SILVERSMITHS, PRECIOUS STONE WORKERS
5496 FLORAL ARRANGERS, FLORISTS
5499 HAND CRAFT OCCUPATIONS NEC

5491 GLASS AND CERAMICS
MAKERS, DECORATORS AND
FINISHERS
Glass and ceramics makers, form, shape, decorate,
smooth and polish glassware, earthenware, refractory
goods, clay bricks and other ceramic goods.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs at Levels 1, 2 and 3 are available in some areas.

• throws, casts and presses clay by hand or machine

1

2

3

to form pottery, stoneware or refractory goods
such as bricks, crucibles, ornaments, sanitary
furnishings, saggars, cups, saucers, plates and
roofing tiles;

• cuts and joins unfired stoneware pipes to form
junctions and gullies, moulds sealing bands on
clay pipes, prepares and joins porcelain or
earthenware components and assists crucible
makers and stone workers with their tasks;

• applies decorative designs and finishes to
glassware, optical glass and ceramic goods by
grinding, smoothing, polishing, cutting, etching,
dipping, painting or transferring patterns or
labels.

TASKS

• uses hand tools and operates machinery to heat,

Major Group 5

MINOR GROUP 549
SKILLED TRADES NEC

4

5

6

RELATED JOB TITLES

bend, shape, press, drill and cut glass;

• makes artificial eyes, laminated glass sheets or
blocks, glass fibre tissue, wool, filament and
matting, marks optical lenses and assembles
rimless spectacles;

• makes models and moulds from moulding clay
and plaster for use in the making and casting of
pottery and other ceramic goods;

Brick maker
Caster (ceramics mfr)
Ceramic artist
Glass blower
Glass cutter
Glass maker
Lithographer (ceramics mfr)
Potter

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

203

Major Group 5

5492 FURNITURE MAKERS,
OTHER CRAFT
WOODWORKERS
Furniture makers and other craft woodworkers make,
repair and restore wooden furniture, decorative
objects and other crafted pieces of woodwork.

5493 PATTERN MAKERS (MOULDS)
Pattern makers (moulds) make patterns from wood,
metal, plaster and plastics for use in making moulds
for metal castings.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1

2

There are no formal entry requirements, although
entrants typically possess a variety of academic and
vocational qualifications. Training is provided offand on-the-job. A number of NVQs/SVQs covering
various aspects of furniture production and wood
machining are available at Levels 1, 2 and 3. A
Modern Apprenticeship in Cabinet Making is
available at NVQ/SVQ Level 3.

There are no formal entry requirements, although
some employers may require GCSEs/S grades.
Training is typically provided by an apprenticeship
combining technical training and practical work
experience.

TASKS

• examines drawings and specifications to
determine job requirements and appropriate
materials;

3

4

TASKS

• selects, measures, cuts and shapes wood using

• examines drawings and specifications to

hand and machine tools to form wooden patterns;

determine job requirements and appropriate
materials;

• machines and fits metal castings and/or metal

• selects, measures, cuts and shapes wood using
saws, chisels, planes, powered handtools and
woodworking machines;

• assembles parts with nails, screws, dowels or

5

adhesives and fits locks, catches, hinges, castors,
drawers, shelves and other fittings;

• removes, replaces or repairs damaged parts of
wooden furniture;

parts to form metal;

• pours plaster around wooden pattern and fills
plaster mould with resin to form pattern;

• compares pattern dimensions with original
drawings using callipers, micrometers,
protractors, etc.;

• smoothes surface of pattern with grinding
machine or emery cloth.

• measures floor area to be covered and lays wood
blocks, parquet panels or hardwood strips;

6

• matches and marks out veneers ready for cutting
and examines and repairs defects in veneer or
plywood sheets.

7

8

RELATED JOB TITLES
Engineer's pattern maker
Model maker (engineering)
Pattern maker (metal trades)
Wood pattern maker

RELATED JOB TITLES
Antiques restorer
Cabinet maker
Coffin maker
Furniture fitter
Picture frame maker
Veneer preparer
Wood carver

9
204

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

5494 MUSICAL INSTRUMENT
MAKERS AND TUNERS
Musical instrument makers and tuners make, adjust,
string, tune and repair musical instruments, make
bows and assemble, install and regulate piano action
parts.

Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades.
Training is by apprenticeship or through specialised
college courses.

is either by apprenticeship or study for a prevocational qualification. These range from craft to
degree level awards.

TASKS

Major Group 5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• marks out and cleans stone and operates lathe,
TASKS

• examines drawings and specifications to

grinding wheel, or rotating disc to cut, shape and
smooth stone;

determine appropriate materials and job
requirements;

• uses hand and machine tools to make mounts and

• selects, cuts, drills, carves and planes wood to

• cuts blank metal pieces and uses hand and

make up parts for the assembly of pianos, organs,
violins, cellos and other instruments;

machine tools to beat, spin or form metal to
required shape;

• assembles and joins prepared parts such as body

• assembles metal pieces by soldering, bolting,

sections, springs, pads, keys, pipes, dampers,
bellows, stretched vellum, etc. to make wind and
string instruments, drums, organs and bows;

brazing and riveting to form tea services,
tankards, jewellery and other precious metal
articles;

• uses tuning fork and hand tools to tune pianos

• anneals, butts, decorates, etches out monographs,

and organs and adjusts organ pipes to improve
tone quality, volume and pitch;

• fits prepared action assemblies and pedal
movements into piano cases and repairs or
replaces worn or broken strings, dampers,
hammers and felt.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Musical instrument maker
Organ builder
Piano tuner
Violin repairer

5495 GOLDSMITHS,
SILVERSMITHS, PRECIOUS
STONE WORKERS
Goldsmiths, silversmiths and precious stone workers
make and repair jewellery and precious metalware,
set, cut and polish gems and other stones, decorate
metalware and make master patterns for articles of
jewellery.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
GCSEs/S grades are not usually required, though
some may be required for full-time courses. Training

then to set gems in prepared mounts;

1

crests and designs using hand and machine tools;

• makes master pattern of articles using wood, wax,

2

3

metal, or other materials.

RELATED JOB TITLES

4

Diamond mounter
Diamond polisher
Gem setter
Goldsmith
Manufacturing jeweller
Silversmith

5

5496 FLORAL ARRANGERS,
FLORISTS

6

Floral arrangers and florists design and make up
floral bouquets, wreaths, tributes and other floral
arrangements for sale to the public.

7
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although some employers may request GCSEs/S
grades. Off- and on-the-job training is provided.
NVQs/SVQs in Floristry are available at Levels 2
and 3. Professional qualifications are also available.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

205

Major Group 5

• makes wigs, beards and other artificial hairpieces

TASKS

from human hair or synthetic materials;

• purchases fresh flowers and other floristry items
such as ribbons, wire, cards, artificial flowers
etc. from wholesalers;

• designs wreaths, bouquets, posies and button
holes and selects appropriate foliage trimmings;

• interweaves canes of willow, withy, bamboo,
rattan or similar material to make baskets and
other pieces of wickerwork;

• charges fireworks, cartridges and other munitions
with explosive material;

• wraps flower stems as necessary and selects or
makes up suitable frame for flower arrangement;

• makes childrens toys, dolls, models, candles,
artificial flowers and other fancy goods

• secures flowers to frame and adds foliage,

1

ribbons, etc. until the desired effect is achieved;

• makes, maintains and adapts surgical and
orthopaedic appliances.

• arranges for the delivery of floral arrangements
as requested by the customer.
RELATED JOB TITLES

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Floral designer
Florist
Flower arranger

3
5499 HAND CRAFT OCCUPATIONS
NEC

4

5

Workers in this unit group engrave jewellery and
stoneware, make artificial hairpieces, charge fireworks
and munitions with explosive material, and make
lampshades, wickerwork, toys, dolls, models, candles,
artificial flowers, other fancy goods, and perform other
hand craft occupations not elsewhere classified in
MINOR GROUP 549: Skilled Trades n.e.c.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

7

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically via apprenticeship or through
specialised courses. NVQs/SVQs are available in
some areas.

TASKS

• uses hand or machine tools to engrave letters,
patterns and other designs on jewellery and
stoneware;

8

• constructs wire frames for lampshades, arranges
and stretches covering material over frame, and
secures covering material;

9
206

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Basket maker (not wire)
Billiard table fitter
Blind maker
Lampshade maker
Toy maker
Wig maker

This major group covers occupations whose tasks involve the provision of a service to
customers, whether in a public protective or personal care capacity. The main tasks
associated with these occupations involve the care of the sick and the elderly; the supervision
of children; the care of animals; and the provision of travel, personal care and hygiene
services.
Most occupations in this major group require a good standard of general education and
vocational training. To ensure high levels of integrity, some occupations require professional
qualifications or registration with professional bodies.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:

Major Group 6

MAJOR GROUP 6
PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

1

2

61 CARING PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
611
612
613

HEALTHCARE AND RELATED PERSONAL SERVICES
CHILDCARE AND RELATED PERSONAL SERVICES
ANIMAL CARE SERVICES

3

62 LEISURE AND OTHER PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
621
622
623
629

4

LEISURE AND TRAVEL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
HAIRDRESSERS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
HOUSEKEEPING OCCUPATIONS
PERSONAL SERVICES OCCUPATIONS NEC

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

207

Major Group 6

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 61
CARING PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this sub-major group assist health professionals in the care of patients, supervise
the activities of pre-school age children, assist teachers with non-teaching duties, provide
technical assistance to veterinarians, and provide other services in the care of animals.

MINOR GROUP 611
HEALTHCARE AND RELATED PERSONAL SERVICES

1

2

Workers in health care and related personal services transport patients by ambulance,
stretcher, wheelchair or other means and assist health professionals with the care of patients
in hospitals, dental surgeries, nursing homes, clinics and within the home.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
6111
6112
6113
6114
6115

3

NURSING AUXILIARIES AND ASSISTANTS
AMBULANCE STAFF (EXCLUDING PARAMEDICS)
DENTAL NURSES
HOUSEPARENTS AND RESIDENTIAL WARDENS
CARE ASSISTANTS AND HOME CARERS

4
6111 NURSING AUXILIARIES AND
ASSISTANTS

5

Nursing auxiliaries and assistants assist doctors,
nurses and other health professionals in caring for
the sick and injured within hospitals, homes, clinics
and the wider community.

• prepares patient for examination and treatment;
• distributes and serves food, assists patients in
feeding and prepares snacks and hot drinks;

• assists patients in washing, dressing, toiletry
activities and general mobility;

• changes bed linen, makes beds and tidies
wards.

6

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Off- and on-the-job training is provided. NVQs/
SVQs in Care are available at Levels 2 and 3.

7
TASKS

• performs basic clinical tasks such as taking

8

patients' temperature and pulse, weighing and
measuring, performing urine tests and extracting
blood samples;

9
208

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Assistant nurse
Nursing assistant
Nursing auxiliary
Occupational therapy helper
Operating department assistant
Phlebotomist
Physiotherapy helper
Ward assistant
Ward orderly

entrants work towards the National Certificate for
Dental Nurses.

Ambulance staff transport sick, injured and
convalescent persons and give first aid treatment in
emergencies.

TASKS

• prepares patient for examination;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Major Group 6

6112 AMBULANCE STAFF
(EXCLUDING PARAMEDICS)

• prepares and sterilises instruments;
• hands required equipment and medication to
dentist during examination;

Academic qualifications are not normally required.
Entry requirements vary between ambulance
services. Entrants must have usually possessed a
full clean driving licence for one to two years.
Entrants undertake a minimum of 2 weeks training
in first aid and patient care. The ambulance
proficiency certificate is awarded upon completion
of 12 to 18 months of assessed practical experience
in an accident and emergency environment.

RELATED JOB TITLES

TASKS

Dental nurse
Dental surgery assistant

• assists with minor treatment, such as preparing
• maintains records, processes and mounts x-ray
films and undertakes reception duties.

2

3

• drives ambulance or accompanies driver to
transport patients to hospitals or other treatment
centres and homes;

• ascertains nature of injuries and provides first
aid treatment;

• cleans and disinfects ambulance after use;
• replenishes medical supplies in ambulance as
necessary.

1

materials for fillings;

6114 HOUSEPARENTS AND
RESIDENTIAL WARDENS
Houseparents and residential wardens are
responsible for the care and supervision of children,
young offenders and the elderly within residential
homes and nurseries, schools or institutions for
young offenders.

4

5
RELATED JOB TITLES
Ambulance driver
Ambulance technician
Ambulanceman/woman

6113 DENTAL NURSES
Dental nurses prepare patients for, and assist with,
dental examinations, prepare and sterilise
instruments and maintain case records.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Entrants must typically be 18 years old and have
experience of working in a care environment. Both
off- and on-the-job training is available. BTEC/SQA
awards and NVQs/SVQs covering various aspects
of care are available.

6

7
TASKS

• creates friendly, secure atmosphere and tries to
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

gain the trust and confidence of those in the home
or under supervision;

8

• plans and participates in games and leisure
Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades.
Training is available both off- and on-the-job. Most

activities to encourage emotional, social, physical
and intellectual development;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

209

Major Group 6

• ensures that all material needs of residents are
provided and endeavours to resolve any
problems that they may have;

• establishes and maintains contact with members
of the neighbouring community and/or the
residents' family and friends;

• maintains contact and discusses problems/
progress with other staff and social workers.

1

2

3

4

5

RELATED JOB TITLES
Houseparent
Matron (residential home)
Resident warden
Warden (sheltered housing)

6115 CARE ASSISTANTS AND
HOME CARERS
Care assistants and home carers attend to the personal
needs and comforts of the elderly and infirm, either
within residential establishments or at home.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Entrants must typically be 18 years old and have
experience of working in a care environment. Both
off- and on-the-job training is available. BTEC/SQA
awards and NVQs/SVQs covering various aspects
of care are available.

6
TASKS

• assists residents to dress, undress, wash and
bathe;

7

• serves meals to residents at table or in bed;
• accompanies infirm residents on outings and
assists with recreational activities;

8

• undertakes light cleaning and domestic duties as
required.

9
210

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Care assistant
Home care assistant
Night care assistant
Residential social worker

Workers in childcare and related personal services supervise play and other activities for
pre-school age children, assist teachers with their non-teaching duties and care for children
in day or residential nurseries, children's homes and private households.

Major Group 6

MINOR GROUP 612
CHILDCARE AND RELATED PERSONAL SERVICES

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
6121
6122
6123
6124

NURSERY NURSES
CHILDMINDERS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
PLAYGROUP LEADERS/ASSISTANTS
EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANTS

1

2
6121 NURSERY NURSES
Nursery nurses care for children in day or residential
nurseries, children's homes, maternity units and
similar establishments.

6122 CHILDMINDERS AND
RELATED OCCUPATIONS
Childminders and related occupations perform a
variety of domestic activities in the day-to-day care
of children, and supervise and participate in their
play, educational and other activities.

3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is most common with GCSEs/S grades
followed by the award of a certificate from the
Council for Awards in Childrens Care and Education.
NVQs/SVQs in Child Care and Education are
available at Levels 2 and 3.

TASKS

• baths, dresses, prepares feed for and feeds babies;

4

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry may not depend upon academic qualifications,
although employers may expect a candidate to
possess a qualification accredited the Council for
Awards in Children's Care or other qualifications.
Childminders must be registered with local
authorities to verify their fitness to provide day care.
NVQs/SVQs in Child Care and Education are
available at Levels 2 and 3.

5

6

• changes babies clothing whenever necessary;
• supervises young children at mealtimes;

TASKS

• organises games and other activities and

• assists children to wash and dress;

supervises children's play.

• prepares and serves children's meals and

7

supervises children during meals;
RELATED JOB TITLES
Crèche assistant
Nursery assistant
Nursery nurse

• mends, washes and irons children's clothes and
tidies their rooms;

• supervises and participates in children's games,
play, educational and other activities.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

211

Major Group 6

RELATED JOB TITLES

6124 EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANTS

Au pair
Child minder
Children's nanny

Educational assistants assist teachers with, or relieve
them of, a variety of non-teaching duties.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6123 PLAYGROUP LEADERS/
ASSISTANTS

1

Playgroup leaders/assistants deliver and facilitate
play opportunities for children in a range of formal
and informal settings including play groups, play
schemes, free play locations and after-school
activities.

Academic qualifications may be required by some
employers, although entry is possible with relevant
experience alone.

TASKS

• assists teacher with preparation or clearing up

2

3

of classroom;
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• looks after lesson materials such as paper, pencils

Entry may not depend upon academic qualifications,
although some employers may expect candidate to
possess a certificate from the Council for Awards in
Children's Care or other qualifications. NVQs/SVQs
in Child Care and Education are available at Levels
2 and 3.

• assists children with washing or dressing for

and crayons;
outdoor and similar activities;

• makes simple teaching aids and constructs
thematic displays of educational material or
children's work;

• works with individual children as directed by the

4

class teachers or other senior member of staff.
TASKS

• supervises children's games and encourages the

5

development of physical, social and language
skills;

• prepares paints, glue, paper, toys, etc. for
children's activities;

• organises and supervises children on excursions;

6

• organises and supervises children's activities
in accordance with Health and Safety
regulations;

• puts away equipment and cleans premises after

7

use.

RELATED JOB TITLES

8

Play leader
Playgroup assistant
Playgroup leader

9
212

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Classroom helper
Education care officer
Non-teaching assistant
School helper
Special needs helper

Workers in this minor group provide technical assistance to veterinarians, care for animals
in stables, kennels, zoos and other such establishments, provide specialised grooming and
clipping services for animals and capture stray or unruly dogs.

Major Group 6

MINOR GROUP 613
ANIMAL CARE SERVICES

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
6131 VETERINARY NURSES AND ASSISTANTS
6139 ANIMAL CARE OCCUPATIONS NEC

1

6131 VETERINARY NURSES AND
ASSISTANTS

6139 ANIMAL CARE
OCCUPATIONS NEC

Veterinary nurses and assistants provide technical
assistance to veterinarians in the treatment and care
of sick or injured animals.

Workers in this unit group care for animals held in
kennels, stables, zoos and similar establishments,
provide specialised grooming, clipping and trimming
services for animals, and searches for and captures
stray or nuisance dogs in public areas.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants require GCSEs/S grades or an equivalent
qualification. Entrants must obtain employment at
an approved veterinary practice to gain practical
experience and tuition with an employer for a
minimum duration of two years. Candidates must
also pass professional examinations before
qualifying as a veterinary nurse.

the diagnosis and treatment of animal injuries
and disorders and prepares animals for autopsies;

• prepares operating theatre, sterilises equipment

3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entry is possible without formal academic
qualifications, although some employers may ask for
GCSEs/S grades. There are a variety of vocational
qualifications available, including NVQs/SVQs in
Animal Care at Levels 1 and 2, and in Dog Grooming
at Levels 2 and 3.

TASKS

• carries out tests, operates x-ray equipment to aid

2

4

5

TASKS

• feeds, washes, grooms, trims and exercises
animals;

6

and assists in theatre as required;

• dispenses medicines and applies dressings to
animals;

• feeds, waters and exercises animals and keeps
their quarters clean and tidy.

• cleans animals' quarters and renews bedding as
necessary;

• checks animals for illness, treats minor ailments
or calls for vet if further treatment is required;

7

• meets prospective owners and advises on animal
selection and animal care;
RELATED JOB TITLES
Animal technician
Veterinary assistant

• patrols public areas to search for and capture
stray or nuisance dogs, and transports captured
animals to kennels.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

213

Major Group 6

RELATED JOB TITLES
Canine beautician
Dog warden
Groom
Kennel maid
Zoo keeper

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
214

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers within Leisure and Other Personal Service Occupations provide services and
equipment for sporting and recreational activities, make travel arrangements for clients,
provide ancillary services for travellers, provide hairdressing and beauty services, undertake
domestic and care-taking duties in private households, public buildings and other
establishments, provide funeral services and control pests hazardous to public health.

Major Group 6

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 62
LEISURE AND OTHER PERSONAL SERVICE
OCCUPATIONS

1
MINOR GROUP 621
LEISURE AND TRAVEL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
Workers in leisure and travel service occupations organise and maintain services and
equipment necessary for sporting and recreational activities, advise upon and make travel
arrangements for customers and provide services to enhance the enjoyment, comfort and
safety of holidaymakers and air, rail, and sea passengers.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
6211
6212
6213
6214
6215
6219

2

3

SPORTS AND LEISURE ASSISTANTS
TRAVEL AGENTS
TRAVEL AND TOUR GUIDES
AIR TRAVEL ASSISTANTS
RAIL TRAVEL ASSISTANTS
LEISURE AND TRAVEL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS NEC

4

5
6211 SPORTS AND LEISURE
ASSISTANTS
Sports and leisure assistants offer odds and accept
bets on the result of sporting and other events, control
gambling activities, provide and maintain facilities
for sporting and recreational activities and supervises
its use, and maintain the continuity of entertainment
and social events.

TASKS

• assesses likely outcome of event and establishes
odds, accepts and records bets, issues receipts
and pays out on winning bets;
and other gambling activities according to
established rules;

• maintains sports and leisure equipment and
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades. A variety of vocational qualifications are
available in Sports and Recreation and Leisure and
Tourism.

6

• controls the progress of games of cards, roulette

prepares equipment for use;

7

• supervises the use of swimming pools,
gymnasium apparatus, fitness machines and other
recreational equipment;

• maintains hygienic operation of swimming pools

8

and associated facilities such as jacuzzis, showers
and changing areas;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

215

Major Group 6

• carries clubs for golfers, advises on the layout
and distance of golf courses and appropriate
choice of golf club;

• announces acts, makes introductions, proposes
toasts and maintains the continuity of
entertainment events and social functions.

6213 TRAVEL AND TOUR GUIDES
RELATED JOB TITLES

1

2

Croupier
Lifeguard
Recreation assistant
Turf accountant
Wardrobe mistress

6212 TRAVEL AGENTS
Travel agents advise travellers upon travel
arrangements, make bookings and receive payment
for travel arrangements made.

3
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

4

Travel agency clerk
Travel agent
Travel sales executive

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although many employers require entrants to possess
GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically received onthe-job. NVQs/SVQs in Travel Services are
available at Levels 2 and 3.

Travel and tour guides ensure that travel
arrangements made for clients run smoothly and
provide a range of services to enhance the enjoyment,
comfort and safety of passengers.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Academic qualifications may be required by some
employers. Spoken fluency in a foreign language is
essential for some posts. NVQs/SVQs in Travel
Services are available at Levels 2 and 3.

TASKS

• receives passengers, checks tickets and conducts
them to their seats;

• makes announcements to passengers regarding
the details of travel arrangements and deals with
any queries;

• assists with the booking and transfer of luggage

5

and other items;
TASKS

• comments on places of interest during the
• discusses client requirements and shows

journey;

brochures containing suitable packages;

6

• establishes availability with tour operators and
makes bookings;

• consults travel time tables, books travel tickets
and accommodation;

• handles cash, debit and credit card payment;

7

accommodation at stop over points;

• responds to enquiries and complaints, makes
arrangements and takes bookings for excursions
and other entertainment, and provides assistance
and advice to holidaymakers.

• advises on issues of currency, passports, visa
requirements, insurance, car hire and health
precautions required.

8

• makes local arrangements for food and

RELATED JOB TITLES
Booking clerk (travel agents)
Reservations clerk (travel)

9
216

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Coach guide
Courier (tour operator)
Escort
Guide
Representative (tour operator)

Air travel assistants issue travel tickets and boarding
passes, examines other documentation, provide
information and assistance at airport terminals and
look after the welfare, comfort and safety of
passengers travelling in aircraft.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Entrants usually possess GCSEs/S grades. Fluency
in a foreign language may also be required in some
posts. Training typically lasts between 3 to 6 weeks
followed by a 6 to 12 month probationary period of
on-the-job training.

with the arrival and departure of trains and the
movement of goods and passengers.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although entrants are required to take a medical
examination and have normal colour vision.
Training is provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Rail Transport (Passenger) are available
at Level 2.

of a railway station;

• receives passengers at airport terminal, examines

• helps with passenger enquiries and makes

tickets and other documentation, checks in
luggage and distributes boarding passes;

announcements over a public address system at
stations;

• checks emergency equipment, distributes reading

• loads and unloads mail, goods and luggage,

material, blankets and other items, and ensures
that the aircraft is ready for the receipt of
passengers;

• welcomes passengers on board the aircraft,

2

3

operates lifts and hoists and drives small trucks;

• assists passengers with special needs to board
and leave trains;

conducts them to their seat and assists with
any hand luggage, ensures that sufficient
stocks of meals and beverages are on board
the aircraft prior to take off and serves
passengers during the flight;

• checks control panel operation before start of

• makes announcements on behalf of the pilot,

passenger enquiries, and takes charge of goods
being transported on train.

demonstrates the use of emergency equipment
and checks that safety belts are fastened.

1

TASKS

• examines and collects tickets at the ticket barrier
TASKS

Major Group 6

6214 AIR TRAVEL ASSISTANTS

4

journey, operates train door controls and signals
to driver to start or stop train;

• inspects and issues tickets on trains, deals with

5

RELATED JOB TITLES

6

RELATED JOB TITLES
Air hostess
Air steward/stewardess
Aircraft purser
Cabin attendant
Passenger services agent

Conductor (railways)
Revenue protection officer (railways)
Ticket collector (railways)
Train guard

7

6215 RAIL TRAVEL ASSISTANTS

6219 LEISURE AND TRAVEL
SERVICE OCCUPATIONS NEC

Rail travel assistants issue, collect and inspect travel
tickets, provide information and assistance to railway
passengers, operate train doors, and perform a
variety of duties on station platforms in connection

Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
leisure and travel service occupations not elsewhere
classified in MINOR GROUP 621: Leisure and
Travel Service Occupations.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

217

Major Group 6

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is received on-the-job. Vocational
qualifications are available in some areas.

TASKS

• observes regulations concerning the carrying

1

capacity of vehicles and controls the boarding
of passengers accordingly;

• signals to driver when to stop and start bus,

2

collects fares from passengers and issues
tickets and changes destination indicators as
necessary;

• completes way-bill at scheduled points on route
and balances cash taken with tickets issued;

• receives passengers on ship, examines tickets and

3

other documentation, directs them to their cabin
and assists with any luggage;

• makes announcements to passengers and deals
with enquiries;

• serves food and beverages to passengers.

4
RELATED JOB TITLES

5

Bus conductor
Ship's steward

6

7

8

9
218

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Hairdressers and related occupations cut, style and treat hair, apply cosmetics and give
facial and body beauty treatments.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

Major Group 6

MINOR GROUP 622
HAIRDRESSERS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS

6221 HAIRDRESSERS, BARBERS
6222 BEAUTICIANS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS

1
6221 HAIRDRESSERS, BARBERS
Hairdressers and barbers shampoo, cut, style and
treat hair.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic requirements for
entry, although some colleges require candidates to
possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is provided offand on-the-job and lasts upto three years leading to
the awarding of NVQs/SVQs at Levels 1, 2 and 3.
Modern Apprenticeships leading to an NVQ/SVQ
at Level 3 are also available.

6222 BEAUTICIANS AND RELATED
OCCUPATIONS
Beauticians and related workers give facial and body
beauty treatments, apply cosmetics and dress wigs.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic requirements for
entry, although some colleges require candidates to
possess GCSEs/S grades. NVQs/SVQs in Beauty
Therapy are available at Levels 1, 2 and 3.
Professional qualifications are also available.

2

3

4

TASKS
TASKS

• discusses customer requirements and cuts and

• discusses clients requirements, advises client on
skin care and applies creams or lotions to the
face or body;

trims hair using scissors, clippers, razor and comb;

• massages scalp, face and other parts of the body;

• washes, bleaches, tints, dyes or waves hair and

• uses waxing, sugaring and epilation techniques

provides any necessary scalp treatments;

• combs, brushes, blow-dries or sets wet hair in
rollers to style or straighten;

• shaves and trims beards and moustaches;
• collects payment, arranges appointments and
cleans and tidies salon.

5

to remove any unwanted bodily hair;

• cleans, shapes and polishes finger and/or toe nails;

6

• applies make-up to hide blemishes or emphasise
facial features;

• advises clients on diet and exercise to assist in
weight loss and slimming.

7

RELATED JOB TITLES
RELATED JOB TITLES
Barber
Hair stylist
Hairdresser

Beautician
Make-up artist
Manicurist
Slimming consultant

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

219

Major Group 6

MINOR GROUP 623
HOUSEKEEPING OCCUPATIONS
Domestic staff and related occupations workers supervise, co-ordinate and undertake
domestic tasks in private households, hotels, schools, hostels and other residential
establishments, take care of schools, churches, offices, flats and other buildings.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
6231 HOUSEKEEPERS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
6232 CARETAKERS

1

2

6231 HOUSEKEEPERS AND
RELATED OCCUPATIONS
Housekeepers and related workers supervise and
perform domestic cleaning and other housekeeping
tasks within private households, hotels, schools,
hostels and other non-private households.

3

5

Butler
Cook-housekeeper
Housekeeper
Valet

6232 CARETAKERS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

4

RELATED JOB TITLES

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although entrants typically possess GCSEs/S grades
or an equivalent qualification. NVQs/SVQs in
Catering and Hospitality (Housekeeping) at Level 2
and Accommodation Supervision at Level 3 are
available. Modern Apprenticeships at NVQ/SVQ
Level 3 are also available.

Caretakers supervise and undertake the care and
maintenance of church, school, office and other
buildings and furnishings.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required. Training
is provided.

TASKS
TASKS

• controls the purchase and storing of food,

6

cleaning materials and other household supplies;

• maintains household records;
• supervises the activities of cleaners and other
housekeeping staff and inspects work undertaken;

7

8

• performs a variety of domestic tasks including

• locks and unlocks doors and entrances at
appropriate times;

• supervises and/or undertakes the cleaning and
maintenance of premises;

• controls heating, lighting and security systems;

food preparation and service, cleaning, washing
and ironing;

• undertakes minor repairs and notifies owner of

• assists employer in washing, dressing, packing

• checks fire and safety equipment for adequate

and other personal activities.

9
220

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

need for major repairs;
functioning.

Major Group 6

RELATED JOB TITLES
Caretaker
Janitor
School caretaker

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

221

Major Group 6

MINOR GROUP 629
PERSONAL SERVICES OCCUPATIONS NEC
Workers in this minor group make funeral arrangements for clients, prepare bodies for
burial or cremation, assist the proceedings of funerals, and investigate and destroy pests
hazardous to public health.
6291 UNDERTAKERS AND MORTUARY ASSISTANTS
6292 PEST CONTROL OFFICERS

1
6291 UNDERTAKERS AND
MORTUARY ASSISTANTS

2

3

4

5

Undertakers and mortuary assistants make funeral
arrangements for clients, prepare the deceased for
burial or cremation, and supervise and assist the
proceedings of funerals.

There are no formal academic requirements although
some employers require candidates to possess
GCSEs/S grades. A full driving licence is often
required. Training is provided on-the-job.
Professional qualifications in funeral directing and
embalming are available.

TASKS

completion of necessary documents;
deceased to discuss preparations for funeral;
on behalf of client;

8

Pest control officers investigate the presence of pests
that are hazardous to public health or cause nuisance,
lay traps to capture pests and treat areas of
infestation.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry qualifications,
though some employers may expect entrants to
possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is provided onthe-job, supplemented by specialist courses covering
different aspects of pest control.

• interviews relative or representative of the
• liaises with cemetery or crematorium authorities

7

Bearer (funeral directors)
Embalmer
Funeral director
Undertaker

6292 PEST CONTROL OFFICERS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• collects body of deceased and assists with the

6

RELATED JOB TITLES

• washes and injects body with sterilising fluid to

TASKS

• receives reports from public, property owners
and authorities regarding the presence of pests
and infestations;

prevent deterioration prior to funeral, and applies
cosmetics, wax and other materials to restore
normal appearance;

• visits sites to investigate the presence of rodents,

• provides hearse and funeral cars and leads funeral

• lays traps to capture pests, and fumigates and

procession;

• controls the operations of crematoriums and
cemeteries and processes legal documentation.

9
222

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

infestations and other pests that may be
hazardous to public health;
disinfects areas to remove infestations;

• advises property owners on courses of action to
prevent the return of pests;

Major Group 6

• liaises with environmental health officers,
housing officers and other relevant authorities
where measures on a large scale are required to
remove pests;

• returns to sites to examine contents of traps laid
and the continued presence of reported pests;

• treats wood for effects of termites, woodworm
and other infestations of timber.

RELATED JOB TITLES

1

Pest control officer
Pest controller

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

223

This major group covers occupations whose tasks require the knowledge and experience
necessary to sell goods and services, accept payment in respect of sales, replenish stocks of
goods in stores, provide information to potential clients and additional services to customers
after the point of sale. The main tasks involve a knowledge of sales techniques, a degree of
knowledge regarding the product or service being sold, familiarity with cash and credit
handling procedures and a certain amount of record keeping associated with those tasks.
Most occupations in this major group require a general education and skills in interpersonal
communication. Some occupations will require a degree of specific knowledge regarding
the product or service being sold, but are included in this major group because the primary
task involves selling.

Major Group 7

MAJOR GROUP 7
SALES AND CUSTOMER SERVICE
OCCUPATIONS

1

2

Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:

3

71 SALES OCCUPATIONS
711
712

SALES ASSISTANTS AND RETAIL CASHIERS
SALES RELATED OCCUPATIONS

4

72 CUSTOMER SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
721

CUSTOMER SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

225

Major Group 7

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 71
SALES OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this sub-major group sell goods and services in retail and wholesale
establishments, accept payment in respect of sales, obtain orders and collect payments for
goods and services from private households, replenish stocks of goods in stores, create
displays of merchandise and perform other sales related occupations.

MINOR GROUP 711
SALES ASSISTANTS AND RETAIL CASHIERS

1

Sales assistants and retail cashiers sell goods and services in retail or wholesale
establishments, accept payments and give change in respect of sales, and obtain, receive
and record telephone orders for goods and services.

2

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

3

7111 SALES AND RETAIL ASSISTANTS
7112 RETAIL CASHIERS AND CHECK-OUT OPERATORS
7113 TELEPHONE SALESPERSONS

4

7111 SALES AND RETAIL
ASSISTANTS
Sales and retail assistants demonstrate and sell a
variety of goods and services in shops, showrooms
and similar establishments.

5

6

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No minimum academic qualifications are required
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades. Training is typically provided on-the-job.
Modern Apprenticeships at NVQ/SVQ Level 3 and
National Traineeships at NVQ Level 2 may be
available. NVQs/SVQs in Retail Operations are
available at Levels 1 and 2.

7

• receives full or partial payment, writes bill,
receipt or docket and packages merchandise for
customer;

• arranges goods on display stands, undertakes
stock checks and assists with the receipt of
deliveries from suppliers into the stock room;

• handles returns and deals with customer
complaints.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Counter assistant
Retail assistant
Sales assistant
Shop assistant

TASKS

• discusses customer requirements, including type
and price range of goods/services desired;

8

• advises customer on selection, purchase, use and
care of merchandise and quotes prices, discounts
and delivery times;

9
226

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

7112 RETAIL CASHIERS AND
CHECK-OUT OPERATORS
Retail cashiers and check-out operators accept
payments from customers and give change in respect
of sales or services.

TASKS

• assesses the characteristics of product/service
There are no minimum academic requirements
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades or relevant experience. Training is typically
provided on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in Retail
Operations are available at Levels 1 and 2.

being sold and decides on its main selling points;

• telephones potential customers, explains purpose
of call, discusses their requirements and advises
on the goods/services being offered;

Major Group 7

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• quotes prices, credit terms and delivery
conditions and records details of orders agreed;
TASKS

• records cost of each item on cash register or by
use of bar code reader and totals the amount to
be paid;

• receives orders for goods/services by telephone

1

and records relevant details;

• stays abreast of advances in product/services
field.

• receives cash, cheque or credit card payment,
gives change and issues receipts for purchase;

• debits customer's account in respect of purchases
or services;

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Telephone canvasser
Telephone salesperson

• monitors fuel taken by self-service customers or

3

refuels vehicle if required;

• reconciles takings with receipts and till rolls and
maintains other transaction records as requested.

4

RELATED JOB TITLES
Cashier (retail trade)
Check-out operator
Forecourt attendant
Petrol pump attendant
Restaurant cashier

5

7113 TELEPHONE SALESPERSONS

6

Telephone salespersons obtain, receive and record
telephone orders for goods and services.

7

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
Academic qualifications may be required. Training
is typically received on-the-job, supplemented by
short courses in practical skills. NVQs/SVQs in
Selling are available at Levels 2 and 3.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

227

Major Group 7

MINOR GROUP 712
SALES RELATED OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group visit private households to obtain orders and collect payments,
deliver and sell food, drink and other goods in streets and open spaces from portable
containers, stalls and vans, collect and deliver laundered and similarly serviced articles,
replenish and display stocks of merchandise, and undertake a variety of sales occupations
not elsewhere classified in MINOR GROUP 712: Sales Related Occupations.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

1

7121
7122
7123
7124
7125
7129

2

3

4

COLLECTOR SALESPERSONS AND CREDIT AGENTS
DEBT, RENT AND OTHER CASH COLLECTORS
ROUNDSMEN/WOMEN AND VAN SALESPERSONS
MARKET AND STREET TRADERS AND ASSISTANTS
MERCHANDISERS AND WINDOW DRESSERS
SALES RELATED OCCUPATIONS NEC

7121 COLLECTOR SALESPERSONS
AND CREDIT AGENTS
Collector salespersons and credit agents visit private
households to obtain orders and collect payments
for goods and services.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

5

6

No academic qualifications are required. Training
is provided on-the-job and may be supplemented by
specialist short courses provided by employers.

Canvasser
Collector-salesperson
Credit agent
Door-to-door salesman/woman
Insurance agent

7122 DEBT, RENT AND OTHER
CASH COLLECTORS
Debt, rent and other cash collectors collect payments
due or overdue from households and businesses and
empty cash from prepayment meters or machines.

TASKS

• calls on household, explains purpose of call and
displays or describes goods/services on offer;

• emphasises main selling point of goods/services

7

RELATED JOB TITLES

to stimulate customer interest;

• quotes prices and terms, collects any payments

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required. Training
is typically provided on-the-job. This may be
supplemented by specialised training courses within
larger agencies.

and completes hire purchase or credit
arrangements;

8

• distributes advertising literature and sample
goods;

• makes follow up calls to obtain further orders.

9
228

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

TASKS

• receives payment at centralised office or calls
on household/business premises;

annotates rent book;

• reads gas, water and electricity meters;
• cleans, services and fills vending machines and
collects money from meters, vending machines
and other cash operated machinery;

• collects tolls from persons wishing to gain access

• calls out, rings bell or otherwise attracts attention
to the items on sale;

• sells goods, records deliveries, takes further
orders or articles requiring servicing and collects
cash or prepares bill;

• returns to depot and hands in unsold goods and

Major Group 7

• records details of transaction, issues receipt or

cash.

to private roads, bridges, piers, etc. and operates
tollgates to control entry;

• remits cash, cheques or credit notes to cashier,
supervisor or bank, building society or post
office.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Collector-agent
Debt collector
Meter reader
Rent collector
Vending machine operator

7123 ROUNDSMEN/WOMEN AND
VAN SALESPERSONS
Roundsmen/women and van salespersons deliver
and sell food, drink and other goods by calling on
householders or by selling from a mobile shop or
van and call on households to collect and receive
payment for laundered or similarly serviced articles.

RELATED JOB TITLES

1

Driver-salesman/woman
Ice-cream salesman/woman
Milkman/woman (milk retailing)
Roundsman/woman
Van salesman/woman

2

7124 MARKET AND STREET
TRADERS AND ASSISTANTS
Market and street traders and assistants sell goods
(other than refreshments) from stalls, barrows and
other portable containers in streets and market places.

3

4

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required.

5
TASKS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required but
candidates should hold a clean driving licence. Offand on-the-job training is provided.

• displays products on stall or barrow;
• calls out to attract attention to goods on offer;
• sells goods at fixed price or by bargaining with

6

customer;

• accepts payment and may wrap goods;
TASKS

• cleans up site on completion of each day's trading.

7

• loads vehicle with food, drink or articles that have
been laundered, etc.;

• drives vehicle over established route and parks
at recognised stopping places or households;

• calls at customers' premises and delivers ordered
goods;

RELATED JOB TITLES
Market assistant
Market trader
Stall holder
Street trader

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

229

Major Group 7

1

7125 MERCHANDISERS AND
WINDOW DRESSERS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Merchandisers and window dressers replenish stocks
of goods in stores, advise retailers on the optimum
display of merchandise and create displays of
merchandise in shop windows.

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job, supplemented
by short courses covering practical skills and details
of the product or service being sold. NVQs/SVQs in
Selling are available at Levels 2 and 3.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TASKS

Entrants typically possess a professional qualification
from the British Design Society, or an approved
vocational qualification. Candidates usually require
GCSEs/S grades.
NVQs/SVQs in Visual
Merchandising are available at Levels 1 and 2.

2
• monitors stock movements, considers customer

4

• advises vendors and purchasers on market prices
of property, accompanies clients to view property
and assists with purchasing arrangements;
problems, seeks new outlets for business and
quotes premiums, bonus rates, tax concessions,
etc.;

requirements and assists customers in completing
orders;

• obtains orders for advertising, financial, catering,

• supplies information about the product to the

• organises parties in private households to sell

retailer and sales staff and deals with customer
enquiries;

clothing, fashion accessories, giftware and other
goods;

• advises retailers on the optimal display of a

• provides demonstrations of a product within

product and of any promotions;

• dismantles existing displays, returns merchandise

5

sold and decides on main selling points;

• advises clients and agents on insurance related
TASKS

3

• assesses characteristics of goods/services being

to relevant departments and prepares area for new
display;

• arranges clothes, accessories, furnishings etc.

printing and transportation services;

retail stores, exhibitions and trade fairs to
promote interest amongst potential customers;

• negotiates agreements for the passage of supply
lines over or under land/property and the siting
of supporting structures and other items.

according to plan or own design.
RELATED JOB TITLES

6

RELATED JOB TITLES
Display assistant (retail trade)
Merchandiser
Window dresser

7
7129 SALES RELATED
OCCUPATIONS NEC

8

Workers in this unit group perform a variety of sales
occupations not elsewhere classified in MINOR
GROUP 712: Sales Related Occupations.

9
230

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Advertising representative
Demonstrator
Negotiator (estate agents)
Sales representative (retail trade)
Wayleave officer

Customer service occupations receive and respond to enquiries regarding products or
services, deal with customer complaints and perform a variety of tasks in the provision of
additional services to customers after the point of sale.

MINOR GROUP 721
CUSTOMER SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group receive and respond to telephone and other enquiries regarding
the products and services offered by an organisation, deal with customer complaints, and
provide further services to customers after the point of sale.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:

Major Group 7

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 72
CUSTOMER SERVICE OCCUPATIONS

1

2

7211 CALL CENTRE AGENTS/OPERATORS
7212 CUSTOMER CARE OCCUPATIONS

3
7211 CALL CENTRE AGENTS/
OPERATORS
Call centre agents and operators receive telephone
calls from potential clients and existing customers
regarding the products and services offered by an
organisation.

• maintains details of calls received, the action
taken as a result of a call and updates customer
records as required;

• arranges for field staff to visit the caller if further
assistance is required.

4

RELATED JOB TITLES
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although many employers expect candidates to
possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically
provided on-the-job, supplemented by specialist
short courses.

TASKS

• answers incoming telephone calls from existing
or prospective customers;

5

Answer line operator
Sales order clerk
Telephone adviser

6

7212 CUSTOMER CARE
OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this unit group provide information to
existing and potential clients regarding the products
and services offered by an organisation, and further
services to customers after the point of sale.

7

• interviews caller to establish the nature of any
complaint or the requirements of the client;

• informs existing and potential customers on any
immediate action to be taken, advises on services
available and sells additional products or
services;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although many employers expect candidates to

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

231

Major Group 7

possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically
provided on-the-job, supplemented by specialist
short courses.

TASKS

• receives enquiries from potential and existing
clients, discusses requirements, and recommends
products or services;

• discusses pricing processes with clients, agrees

1

payment arrangements and handles customer
accounts;

• follows up clients to ensure their satisfaction with
a product or service and to gain renewal of
customer service agreements;

2

• addresses customer complaints and problems;
• informs customers of special promotions and new
product launches.

3

4

RELATED JOB TITLES
Commercial officer (telecommunications)
Customer care adviser
Customer liaison officer
Customer services assistant

5

6

7

8

9
232

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

This major group covers occupations whose main tasks require the knowledge and
experience necessary to operate and monitor industrial plant and equipment; to assemble
products from component parts according to strict rules and procedures and to subject
assembled parts to routine tests; and to drive and assist in the operation of various transport
vehicles and other mobile machinery.

Major Group 8

MAJOR GROUP 8
PROCESS, PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES

Most occupations in this major group do not specify that a particular standard of education
should have been achieved but will usually have an associated period of formal experiencerelated training. Some occupations require licences issued by statutory or professional
bodies.

1

Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:

2

81 PROCESS, PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES
811
812
813
814

3

PROCESS OPERATIVES
PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES
ASSEMBLERS AND ROUTINE OPERATIVES
CONSTRUCTION OPERATIVES

4

82 TRANSPORT AND MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS AND
OPERATIVES
821
822

TRANSPORT DRIVERS AND OPERATIVES
MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS AND OPERATIVES

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

233

Major Group 8

1

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 81
PROCESS, PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES
Process, plant and machine operatives operate and attend machinery to manufacture,
process or otherwise treat foodstuffs, beverages, textiles, chemicals, glass, ceramics,
rubber, plastic, metal, synthetic and other products, operate plant and machinery to
produce paper, wood and related products, extract coal and other minerals from the
earth, attend and operate power generation and water treatment systems, perform routine
operations in the manufacture of motor vehicles, metal goods, electrical products,
clothing and other goods, and perform a variety of tasks in relation to the construction
and repair of buildings, public highways, underground piping systems, railway tracks
and other structures.

2

MINOR GROUP 811
PROCESS OPERATIVES

3

Process operatives set, operate and attend machinery to bake, freeze, heat, crush, mix,
blend and otherwise process foodstuffs, beverages and tobacco leaves, prepare natural and
synthetic fibres for processing, spin and twist fibre into yarn, thread, twine, rope and other
similar material, prepare colouring matter required for printing or dyeing fabrics, and produce
or otherwise treat chemical, glass, ceramics, rubber, plastic, metal, synthetic and other
products.

4

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
8111
8112
8113
8114
8115
8116
8117
8118
8119

5

6

7

8

FOOD, DRINK AND TOBACCO PROCESS OPERATIVES
GLASS AND CERAMICS PROCESS OPERATIVES
TEXTILE PROCESS OPERATIVES
CHEMICAL AND RELATED PROCESS OPERATIVES
RUBBER PROCESS OPERATIVES
PLASTICS PROCESS OPERATIVES
METAL MAKING AND TREATING PROCESS OPERATIVES
ELECTROPLATERS
PROCESS OPERATIVES NEC

8111 FOOD, DRINK AND TOBACCO
PROCESS OPERATIVES

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Food, drink and tobacco process operatives set,
operate and attend machinery to bake, freeze, heat,
crush, mix, blend and otherwise process foodstuffs,
beverages and tobacco leaves.

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though some GCSEs/S grades can be an advantage.
Off- and on-the-job training is available. NVQs/
SVQs in Food and Drink Manufacturing Operations
are available at Levels 1, 2 and 3. NVQs/SVQs in
Tobacco Processing are available at Level 2.

9
234

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

TASKS

• sets, operates and attends machinery and ovens

• directs loading of furnace with prescribed

to mix, bake and otherwise prepare bread and
flour confectionery products;

• operates machinery to crush, mix, malt, cook
and ferment grains and fruits to produce beer,
wines, malt liquors, vinegar, yeast and related
products;

• attends equipment to make jam, toffee, cheese,
processed cheese, margarine, syrup, ice, pasta,
ice-cream, sausages, chocolate, maize starch,
edible fats and dextrin;

• operates equipment to cool, heat, dry, roast,
blanch, pasteurise, smoke, sterilise, freeze,
evaporate and concentrate foodstuffs and liquids
used in food processing;

quantities and types of ingredients;

• sets timing and temperature controls, monitors
pressure gauges, adjusts controls as necessary
and regulates level of glass in furnace as required;

Major Group 8

TASKS

• operates controls to rotate rotary furnaces and
create a vacuum in vacuum furnaces, ensures that
static furnaces are correctly positioned and
switches on current;

• monitors temperature of drying and annealing

1

kilns and reports any significant deviations from
schedule sheet;

• cuts off heat supply after firing/ heating/drying
and cleans furnace and kiln areas.

2

• mixes, pulps, grinds, blends and separates
foodstuffs and liquids with churning, pressing,
sieving, grinding and filtering equipment;

• processes tobacco leaves by hand or machine to
make cigarettes, cigars, pipe and other tobacco
products.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Glass furnace operator
Kiln burner (glass, ceramics mfr)
Kiln placer
Kiln setter

3

4

RELATED JOB TITLES
Bakery assistant
Brewery worker
Dairy worker
Process worker (food products mfr)

8112 GLASS AND CERAMICS
PROCESS OPERATIVES
Workers in this unit group position articles ready
for firing in kilns and operate and attend furnaces
and kilns to make and treat glass and ceramic articles.

8113 TEXTILE PROCESS
OPERATIVES
Workers in this unit group operate machines to
prepare natural and synthetic fibres for processing,
spin and twist fibre into yarn, thread, twine, rope
and other similar material, and estimate the quantities
of colouring matter required for printing and dyeing
fabrics.

5

6

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTS AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Manufacturing Textiles are available at
Levels 1, 2 and 3.

Academic qualifications are not normally required.
Training is mostly on-the-job, the amount and extent
depending on the equipment used and type of
operations performed. NVQs/SVQs covering glass
processing, kiln operations and manufacturing
ceramic items are available at Levels 1 and 2.

TASKS

• sets controls, starts machinery and monitors the

7

8

passage of material processed;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

235

Major Group 8

• replenishes the supply of input fibres, removes
and replaces full output packages, cards and
spools;

• detects blockages, tangled thread, defective or
broken material, and joins broken ends by hand
or mechanical knotting;

• checks quality of completed material, marks any
flaws and removes badly damaged sections;

• examines colour cards or specifications,

1

2

estimates quantity of colouring material needed
to print or dye fibre and calculates and mixes
ingredients accordingly;

8

salt and other chemical solutions to finish and
treat textiles;

• regulates input of polymer into melting unit,

• operates kilns, furnaces and ovens to produce
charcoal, coke and other carbon products;

• cleans and oils machine, detects and reports

RELATED JOB TITLES

• operates machines to coat film and tape with
sensitising material and otherwise impregnate
materials by immersion, split and mould mica
and produce asbestos pipes and sheets;

• cuts and trims skins, hides and pelts, removes
wool, hair, flesh and other waste material, and
washes, limes, tans, dyes and otherwise treats
hides for making into leather, skin and fur
products;

• withdraws samples for quality control testing,
8114 CHEMICAL AND RELATED
PROCESS OPERATIVES

7

• prepares dye, bleaching, water repellent, fixing

fabric and shears or burns off protruding fabric
fibres as required;

4

6

plant equipment, starts operational cycle,
monitors instruments and gauges indicating
conditions affecting the operation of the plant
and adjusts controls as necessary;

• stretches, shrinks, brushes, dampens and presses

Creeler
Spinner (textile mfr)
Stenter operator
Winder (textile mfr)

5

• loads prescribed quantities of ingredients into

extrudes polymer, gathers extruded filaments and
feeds strands through rolling, cutting and
treatment units to produce synthetic fibre;

mechanical faults to technicians.

3

TASKS

Workers in this unit group operate plant and
machinery in the processing of chemical and
related materials by chemical, heat or other
treatment, manufacture synthetic materials and
bleach, dye or otherwise treat textiles, and treat
hides, skins and pelts for making into fur, leather
and skin products.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although some employers require entrants to possess
GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically received onthe-job, supplemented by specialised training
courses. NVQs/SVQs in Process Operations are
available at Levels 1, 2 and 3.

9
236

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

removes and regulates discharge of batch
material upon completion of processing.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Colour mixer
Dye house operative (textile mfr)
Nylon spinner
Paint maker
Process worker (chemical mfr)

8115 RUBBER PROCESS
OPERATIVES
Workers in this unit group attend and operate
masticating, calendering, mixing, forming, shaping,
moulding, extruding, cutting, trimming and winding
machines to make and repair rubber products.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although some employers require entrants to possess
GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically on-the-job,
supplemented by specialised training courses.
NVQs/SVQs in Processing Rubber are available at
Levels 1 and 2.

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job,
supplemented by specialised courses. NVQs/SVQs
in Plastic Processing Operations are available at
Levels 1 and 2. Modern Apprenticeships in Polymer
Processing leading to an NVQ/SVQ at Level 3 are
available.

TASKS

Major Group 8

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1

TASKS

• ascertains ingredients and mixing requirements,
feeds machine or regulates flow from feed
conveyors and hoppers;

• prepares machine for operation by affixing any

• regulates speed, temperature and pressure of

• weighs and mixes ingredients, loads machine

masticating, mixing, extruding and vacuum
moulding machinery;

with plastic to be worked or regulates flow from
feed conveyor or hopper;

• operates winding machinery to form endless belts

• monitors controls regulating temperature,

and builds up rubberised material to form
industrial belting and pneumatic tyres;

pressure, etc. and operates moulding, extruding,
calendering, thermoforming and covering
machines;

• prepares surfaces and coats or lines metal or other
products with rubber;

• trims, sandblasts, or manipulates rubber article
against abrasive wheel to finish product;

• locates defects and repairs worn and faulty
sheathing, belting and rubber and pneumatic
tyres.

necessary attachments;

Curer (rubber)
Rubber moulder (moulds)
Rubber worker
Tyre maker
Vulcaniser

8116 PLASTICS PROCESS
OPERATIVES

3

• inspects plastic products for defects, takes
measurements and repairs plastic belting and
sheathing;

• trims, cuts and performs other finishing

4

operations on plastic using hand and machine
tools;

• makes artificial eyes and contact lens discs, and
RELATED JOB TITLES

2

makes and repairs spectacle frames and plastic
parts of artificial limbs and other orthopaedic
appliances.

5

6

RELATED JOB TITLES
Extruder operator (plastics mfr)
Fabricator (plastics mfr)
Fibreglass laminator
Injection moulder (plastics goods mfr)
Plastic moulder

7

Workers in this unit group attend and operate
moulding, extruding, thermoforming, calendering,
covering, cutting and other process equipment to
make and repair plastic products.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

237

Major Group 8

1

2

8117 METAL MAKING AND
TREATING PROCESS
OPERATIVES
Metal making and treating process operatives operate
furnaces, ovens and other heating vessels, drawing,
rolling, extruding, galvanising, forging and other
metal processing equipment to smelt, shape and treat
metal and metal products.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Steel Making, Steel Refining, Steel Casting
and Metal Forging are available at Levels 2 and 3.

furnace temperature, and adds oxidising, alloying
and fluxing agents as required;
taps slag from surface of molten metal and directs
flow of molten metal into casts;

• sets rolling speed, tension and space between

5

6

7

8

Electroplaters operate continuous plant to coat metal
parts and articles electrolytically, form metal articles
by electro- and vacuum-deposition, dip and spray
articles with another metal, plastic powder or other
material and treat articles chemically to produce
desired surface finishes.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• charges furnace, operates controls to regulate

• withdraws samples of molten metal for analysis,

4

8118 ELECTROPLATERS

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Product Coating are available at Levels 2
and 3.

TASKS

3

Jigger (metal trades)
Rolling mill operator
Wire drawer

rolls, guides the metal to and from rollers, and
monitors the rolling process to detect
irregularities, and ensure that the gauge and finish
match required specifications;

TASKS

• cleans and rinses article or preshaped former to
be coated;

• masks area not to be covered with wax, resistant
adhesive tape or other material;

• fits appropriate nozzle on spray gun, loads spray
gun with appropriate coating material and
prepares electrolytic solutions;

• operates equipment to remove dirt, scale and

• sets machine, plant, or equipment controls to

other surface impurities by immersion in
chemical solution;

regulate electric current and temperature of
molten zinc, tin, chromium, copper or other nonferrous metal;

• heats metal or metal articles in furnace, allows
to cool for a specified time or quenches in brine,
oil or water to harden, reduces brittleness and
restores ductility;

• immerses articles in plating solutions or sprays

• operates piercing, extruding, galvanising,

• removes article from solution and centrifuges, if

pressing and other metal processing equipment
to shape and treat metal or metal articles.

necessary, to remove excess molten metal before
cooling.

article until required thickness of coating has
been deposited;

RELATED JOB TITLES

RELATED JOB TITLES

Annealer
Furnaceman (metal trades)
Heat treatment operator (metal)

Anodiser
Electroplater
Galvaniser

9
238

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Major Group 8

8119 PROCESS OPERATIVES NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
processing occupations not elsewhere classified in
MINOR GROUP 811: Process Operatives.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though some employers may expect entrants to
possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically
provided on-the-job, supplemented by specialist
training courses. NVQs/SVQs in Process Operations
are available at Levels 1, 2 and 3.

1

2

TASKS

• packs products ready for kilnsetting;
• operates kilns, furnaces and ovens to produce

3

cement clinker, linoleum cement and asphalt, to
fire abrasive and carbon products and otherwise
cook and heat treat materials and products not
elsewhere classified;

• operates machines to mix, blend, crush, wash and

4

separate seeds and other materials not elsewhere
classified;

• operates machines to produce flat and corrugated
asbestos cement pipes and sheets;

• performs other processing tasks not elsewhere

5

classified.

RELATED JOB TITLES

6

Concrete worker (concrete products mfr)
Process worker (jewellery, plate mfr)

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

239

Major Group 8

1

MINOR GROUP 812
PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES
Workers in this minor group operate plant and machinery to produce paper, wood and
related products, operate drilling and excavating equipment to extract coal and other
minerals, attend and operate boilers, compressors, turbines, electrical substations and other
power generation equipment, operate machinery to cut, shape and finish metal, operate
and attend water purifying, sedimentation and sewerage systems, and perform other
miscellaneous operative tasks.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
8121
8122
8123
8124
8125
8126
8129

2

3

PAPER AND WOOD MACHINE OPERATIVES
COAL MINE OPERATIVES
QUARRY WORKERS AND RELATED OPERATIVES
ENERGY PLANT OPERATIVES
METAL WORKING MACHINE OPERATIVES
WATER AND SEWERAGE PLANT OPERATIVES
PLANT AND MACHINE OPERATIVES NEC

8121 PAPER AND WOOD MACHINE
OPERATIVES

4

Paper and wood machine operatives operate
machines to produce, treat and cut wood, paper,
paperboard, leatherboard, plasterboard and similar
material, assemble and make wooden crates and
containers.

5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

7

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Paper and Board Making and in Leather
Production are available at Level 2. NVQs/SVQs
in Woodmachining are available at Levels 2
and 3.

and staples, and fits metal strips and corner pieces
to strengthen container as required;

• examines job requirements, ascertains
necessary ingredients and loads machines to
beat, mix and crush wood, cork and pulp for
further processing;

• attends and operates ovens, kilns, milling,
filtering, straining, calendering, coating, drying,
finishing, winding and other machines to produce
and/or treat wood, paper, paperboard,
leatherboard and plasterboard;

• sets and adjusts edge guides, stops and blades of
cutting machine, threads material through rollers
or loads into machine hopper, starts and monitors
operation of machine, removes completed work
and clears machine of waste material.

RELATED JOB TITLES
TASKS

• cuts and shapes wood using hand and power

8

tools, assembles parts of wooden crates, barrels
and other wooden containers using nails, bolts

9
240

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Case maker
Guillotine operator (paper goods mfr)
Sawyer (wood)
Wood machinist

Coal mine operatives detonate charges and use
cutting equipment to extract coal from coal faces,
build and dismantle roof and wall supports in
underground coal workings, and transport coal and
other material from the coal face.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is provided through specialised courses.
NVQs/SVQs in Process Operations (Extraction
Industries) are available. There is a minimum age
limit of 18 years for underground work.

TASKS

• uses machine or portable drill to drill holes to
required depth for blasting, bursting, release of
gas or water infusion;

Major Group 8

8122 COAL MINE OPERATIVES

Power loader (coal mine)
Underground worker

8123 QUARRY WORKERS AND
RELATED OPERATIVES
Quarry workers erect supports in underground
workings, set and detonate explosives to loosen
rocks, and set up and operate drilling equipment to
extract minerals (other than coal) from the ground,
and operate machinery to wash, crush or separate
coal, stone and ores.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Drilling Operations and Process Operations
(Extractive Industries) are available at Level 2.
There is a lower age limit of 18 for underground
work.

1

2

3

• inserts and compacts appropriate explosive,
primer and detonator in drilling hole and
detonates charge to break and loosen coal and
rock from solid formations;

• operates heading, ripping and coal cutting-

TASKS

• inspects blasting area, drills shot holes, inserts
explosives and detonates charges to loosen large
pieces of rock/ore;

loading machines to remove material from
working face, and monitors conveyor carrying
away loose material;

• assembles drilling and cutting tools, operates

• cleans machinery, equipment and tools, and

controls to start machines and to regulate the
speed and pressure of cutting and drilling;

maintains refuge holes, roads and airways;

• erects permanent and temporary wall and roof
supports from dry stone material, timber and metal,
withdraws supports and serviceable material/
equipment from worked out or abandoned faces;

• stows waste in area from which coal has been
removed using feed hopper or stowing machine;

• conveys goods and materials to and from coal face
and work areas, loads and unloads mine cars and
transfers materials from underground and surface
conveyors to bunkers, tubs and rail trucks.

4

5

• erects timber or metal supports to shore up tunnel
and assists tunnel miner with the excavation of
vertical shafts and underground tunnels;

• conveys goods and materials to and from the
workface, loads and unloads mine cars and
transfers materials from underground and surface
conveyors to bunkers, tubs and rail trucks;

• operates agitators/vibrators to separate minerals
and ensures that screened, filtered, crushed and
separated material is discharged to appropriate
chutes or conveyors;

6

7

• performs other mining and quarrying tasks not
RELATED JOB TITLES
Coal miner
Miner (coal mine)

elsewhere classified including digging clay from
open pits, operating high-pressure hoses to wash
china clay from open pit faces and otherwise
assisting miners.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

241

Major Group 8

RELATED JOB TITLES
Miner (mine, not coal)
Quarry worker
Roughneck
Washery operator
Well driller

8124 ENERGY PLANT OPERATIVES

1

Workers in this unit group operate boilers to produce
hot water or steam and attend and operate
compressors, turbines, electrical substations,
switchboards and auxiliary plant and machinery to
fuel nuclear reactors, drive blowers and pumps,
electricity generators and other equipment.

2
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

3

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically by apprenticeship, incorporating
technical training and practical experience. NVQs/
SVQs in Maintaining Electricity Generating Systems
are available at Levels 2 and 3.

Boiler operator
Stoker
Substation attendant (electricity supplier)
Unit operator

8125 METAL WORKING MACHINE
OPERATIVES
Metal working machine operatives operate machines
to cut, shape, abrade and otherwise machine metal,
use hand and power tools to remove surplus metal
and rough surfaces from castings, forgings or other
metal parts, and clean, smooth and polish metal
workpieces.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Engineering Machining are available at
Level 1.

TASKS

4

• secures workpiece in drilling, boring, milling,

TASKS

• determines job requirements from switchboard
attendant or operating instructions;

5

• opens valves and operates controls to regulate

• sets controls, starts machine and operates

the flow of fuel to boiler or generating equipment;

controls to feed tool to workpiece or vice versa
and repositions workpiece during machining as
required;

• operates remote control panel to load fuel and
remove discharged fuel elements from nuclear
reactors;

6

• adjusts controls to maintain correct running speed
of turbine or generator and monitors temperature
and pressure controls on boilers;

• records instrument readings periodically and

7

planing, grinding, lapping, honing,
electrochemical, or other shaping machines, or
loads metal stock on to press;

shuts down turbine/generator or boiler as demand
decreases;

• carries out minor maintenance tasks and
prescribed tests and reports any faults.

• withdraws workpiece and examines accuracy
using measuring instruments;

• operates burning, chipping and grinding
equipment to remove defects from metal parts,
and files, chisels, burns and saws off surplus
metal;

• smoothes rough surfaces with hand tools,
abrasive belts and wheels, compressed air, jets
of vapour, or blasting with shot, grit, sand or other
abrasive material;

• selects and secures polishing head to machine

8

RELATED JOB TITLES
Auxiliary plant attendant
Boiler attendant

9
242

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

tool, prepares head with emery, grease or other
substance, sets speed and angle of polishing head,
and operates controls to feed polishing head to
workpiece or vice versa.

• digs trench and assists pipelayers to lay, renew
or repair sewerage pipes.

Fettler (metal trades)
Grinding machinist (metal trades)
Metal polisher
Press operator (metal trades)
Shot blaster
Tool room machinist

8126 WATER AND SEWERAGE
PLANT OPERATIVES
Water and sewerage plant operatives operate valves
to control water supplies in mains and pipelines,
attend screening, filtering, water purifying and
sedimentation plant, clear any blockages and patrol
and maintain sewerage systems.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Filter attendant (water works)
Plant operator (sewage/water works)
Sewerman
Turncock
Water treatment plant operator

Major Group 8

RELATED JOB TITLES

1
8129 PLANT AND MACHINE
OPERATIVES NEC
Plant and machine operatives n.e.c. operate a variety
of plant and machinery not elsewhere classified in
MINOR GROUP 812: Plant and Machine
Operatives.

2

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Operating Process Plant are available at
Level 2.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

3

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs are available in some areas.

4

TASKS
TASKS

• attends water filtration and purification plant,
monitors chemical treatment, regulates treatment
of water supply within strict guidelines;

• opens and closes valves to regulate quantity and

• operates acetylene torches and other cutting
equipment to dismantle boilers, cars, ships,
railway track, engines, machinery and other scrap
metal;

pressure of water and reports defective valves
or abnormal water pressure;

• bends, coils, crimps and spins metal wires in the

• stops water supply in an emergency and informs

manufacture of cables, springs, rope and other
wire goods;

consumers likely to be affected;

• regulates flow of raw sewage into screening plant,
releases screened sewage and regulates its flow
into detritus pits, sedimentation tanks and
filtration beds;

• cleans out screen compartments, sedimentation
tanks and filtration beds manually or using
mechanical scraper;

• patrols sections of sewer, examines for any
blockages or gas releases and clears blockages
by flushing or by using boring rods;

5

6

• operates machines in the manufacture of nuts,
bolts, nails, screws, pins, rivets, etc.;

• fills grease gun with grease of appropriate grade,
and applies grease or oil to grease points or
lubrication holes in machinery or equipment and
over bearings, axles and other similar parts;

7

• ensures that rollers in rope haulage system are
well greased and running freely;

• inspects machines and equipment, and reports

8

any faults.

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

243

Major Group 8

RELATED JOB TITLES
Duct erector
Guillotine operator (metal trades)
Pumpsman
Saw doctor
Spring maker
Television aerial erector
Wire worker

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
244

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Assemblers and routine operatives perform routine tasks in the wiring of electrical
equipment, assembly of prepared parts in the manufacture of vehicles, electrical, metal
and other goods, inspect, test, sort, weigh and grade products, parts and materials, fit and
repair tyres, exhausts and windscreens on motor vehicles, mark out and cut material for
garment making, sew and embroider garments, perform routine laboratory tests of products
and materials and perform a variety of other routine assembly operations not elsewhere
classified.

1

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
8131
8132
8133
8134
8135
8136
8137
8138
8139

Major Group 8

MINOR GROUP 813
ASSEMBLERS AND ROUTINE OPERATIVES

ASSEMBLERS (ELECTRICAL PRODUCTS)
ASSEMBLERS (VEHICLES AND METAL GOODS)
ROUTINE INSPECTORS AND TESTERS
WEIGHERS, GRADERS, SORTERS
TYRE, EXHAUST AND WINDSCREEN FITTERS
CLOTHING CUTTERS
SEWING MACHINISTS
ROUTINE LABORATORY TESTERS
ASSEMBLERS AND ROUTINE OPERATIVES NEC

2

3

4
8131 ASSEMBLERS (ELECTRICAL
PRODUCTS)
Workers in this unit group wire up prepared parts
and/or sub-assemblies in the manufacture of
electrical and electronic equipment, make coils and
wiring harnesses and assemble previously prepared
parts in the batch or mass production of electrical
and electronic goods and components.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job,
supplemented by short courses. NVQs/SVQs in
Electronic Product Assembly are available at Level 1.

• selects, cuts and connects wire to appropriate
terminals by crimping or soldering;

• positions and secures switches, transformers,
tags, valve holders or other parts and connects
capacitors, resistors, transistors or subassemblies to appropriate terminals by soldering;

5

• lays out and secures wire to make harnesses
and operates machine to wind heavy and light
coils of wire or copper for transformers,
armatures, rotors, stators and light electrical
equipment;

6

• assembles previously prepared electrical or
electronic components by winding, bolting,
screwing or otherwise fastening using an
assembly machine or hand tools.

7

RELATED JOB TITLES
TASKS

• examines drawings, specifications and wiring
diagrams to identify appropriate materials and
sequence of operations;

8

Armature winder
Assembler (electrical, electronic equipment)
Coil winder
Wireman/woman

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

245

Major Group 8

8132 ASSEMBLERS (VEHICLES
AND METAL GOODS)

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Workers in this unit group undertake the routine
assembly of vehicles and other metal goods or
components such as frames, axles, wire brushes and
wheels.

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although some employers require candidates to
possess GCSEs/S grades. Training is typically
received on-the-job, supplemented by training
courses where instruction in specific techniques is
required. Various NVQs/SVQs encompass aspects
of quality control.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1

No academic qualifications are required. In some
cases candidates must take aptitude and dexterity
tests. Normal colour vision is required for some
jobs. Training varies according to the complexity
of the work.

2
• follows instructions and drawings and positions
components on work bench or in assembly
machine;

• assembles prepared components in sequence by

4

soldering, bolting, fastening, spot-welding,
screwing and hammering using power and hand
tools or assembly machine;

• rejects faulty assembly components;
• inspects finished article for faults, monitors

5

assembly machine operation and reports any
faults.

7

8

dents, defective sealing or broken wires by visual
inspection or using aids such as microscopes or
magnifying glasses;
checks assemblies and sub-assemblies against
parts lists to detect missing items;

• sets up test equipment, connects items/system to
power source/pressure outlet, etc. and operates
controls to check performance and operation of
electrical plant and machinery and electronics
systems;

• examines yarn packages, textile fabrics and
garments, wood or wood products, paper and
paperboard, plastics and rubber materials, food
products, food storage containers, etc., checks
specifications, marks any repairable defects and
rejects faulty items;

• reports any recurrent or major defects and
RELATED JOB TITLES

6

• examines articles for surface flaws such as cracks,

• checks sequence of assembly operations and
TASKS

3

TASKS

recommends improvements to production
methods.

Assembler (metal trades)
Car assembler
Lineworker (vehicle mfr)

RELATED JOB TITLES

8133 ROUTINE INSPECTORS AND
TESTERS

Engineering inspector
Examiner (manufacturing)
Passer (manufacturing)
Quality control inspector (manufacturing)
Test engineer
Viewer (electrical goods mfr)

Workers in this unit group inspect and/or test
metal stock, parts and products, electrical plant,
machinery and electronic components, systems
and sub-assemblies, textiles, wood, paper, food,
plastics and rubber goods, parts and materials to
detect processing, manufacturing and other
defects.

9
246

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

8135 TYRE, EXHAUST AND
WINDSCREEN FITTERS

Workers in this unit group weigh, grade and sort
materials, goods and products.

Tyre, exhaust and windscreen fitters fit, repair and
adjust tyres, exhausts and windscreens on cars, buses,
motorcycles and other motor vehicles.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job,
supplemented by short courses relating to the specific
material or product being considered.

TASKS

Major Group 8

8134 WEIGHERS, GRADERS,
SORTERS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job, or
through training programmes within larger
companies. NVQs/SVQs in Vehicle Maintenance
(Service Replacement) are available at Levels 1
and 2.

1

2

• examines hide, skins, leather, fabric, wool, rags,
scrap metal, tobacco pipe bowls, fish, fibres,
ceramics, produce and other goods;

• assesses product quality visually and by touch,

TASKS

• carries out inspection and assesses the nature and
extent of repair necessary;

3

and grades according to weight, thickness, colour
and other quality criteria;

• removes wheel, exhaust or windscreen using

• ascertains material(s) required from order card,

semi-automatic machinery or hand and power
tools;

recipe, or specification and weighs and measures
prescribed quantities accordingly;

• separates tyre from wheel and fits replacement

• uses balances, springs, weighing platforms,

tyre using automatic machine or by using a wheel
stand and hand tools;

automatic scales and weighbridges to check
the weight of goods, products and loaded
vehicles;

• records and calculates gross and net weight,
checks delivery notes and prepares documents
and labels for identification purposes;

4

• inflates tyre to correct pressure, refits wheel to
axle and balances wheel using balancing
machine;

5

• replaces faulty parts of exhaust and refits exhaust
or windscreen to vehicle.

• operates machines to measure lengths of rolls of
material and irregularly shaped materials such
as leather or sheepskin.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Egg grader
Fruit sorter
Selector (ceramics mfr)
Weighbridge clerk
Weigher

RELATED JOB TITLES

6

Exhaust fitter (vehicles)
Tyre and exhaust fitter
Tyre fitter
Windscreen fitter

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

247

Major Group 8

1

8136 CLOTHING CUTTERS

TASKS

Clothing cutters examine fabrics, mark out and cut
material for garment making.

• examines natural and synthetic fabrics of all types

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Manufacturing Sewn Products are available
at Levels 1 and 2.

• operates standard and specialised machines to
sew and repair garments and other textile, fabric,
fur and skin products;

• performs hand sewing tasks in the making and
finishing of fur, sheepskin, leather, upholstery,
mats, carpets, umbrellas and other textile products;

• embroiders decorative designs on, or secures
trimmings to, textile fabric with hand or machine
stitching;

TASKS

2

to identify imperfections and determine best
method of repair;

• examines fabrics or skins for flaws, grain and
stretch;

• cleans and oils machine and reports or remedies
any mechanical faults.

• cuts out blemishes, brushes, combs and moistens
skins;

3

• discusses customer's requirements or examines
photographs or sketches of garment;

• places lay-plan on cloth or marks out garment
parts and linings;

4

5

6

• cuts material using shears, electric knife, or

Burler
Clothing machinist
Lockstitch machinist
Overlocker
Seamstress
Sewing machinist (clothing mfr)

cutting machine.

RELATED JOB TITLES

8138 ROUTINE LABORATORY
TESTERS

Band knife cutter
Clothing cutter
Cutting machinist (clothing mfr)
Marker (clothing mfr)

Routine laboratory testers perform routine checks,
at various stages of production, to verify the physical,
chemical and other quality related characteristics of
materials and products.

8137 SEWING MACHINISTS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Workers in this unit group rectify faults in
manufactured textile goods, repair worn garments
and sew and embroider garments by hand or machine.

7
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8

RELATED JOB TITLES

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is received off- and on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Manufacturing Sewn Products are available
at Levels 1 and 2.

9
248

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades. Training is available both off- and on-thejob. NVQs/SVQs in Laboratory and Associated
Technical Activities are available at Levels 2, 3 and 4.

TASKS

• examines test card to determine type of test
required;

prepares item for testing;

• carries out prescribed tests to check acidity,
alkalinity, absorption, colour, density, elasticity,
solubility, or other physical and chemical
characteristics;

• records test data and cleans, maintains and checks
equipment for reliability.

• sets up and operates machines to apply colour to
wallpaper and to coat articles (other than
ceramic) with paint, cellulose or other protective/
decorative material;

• performs miscellaneous painting and coating
tasks not elsewhere classified including, staining
articles, applying transfers, operating french
polishing machines, removing surplus enamel
from components and marking design outlines
on articles.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Laboratory assistant
Tester (paint mfr)

8139 ASSEMBLERS AND ROUTINE
OPERATIVES NEC

Major Group 8

• sets up appropriate testing equipment and

1

RELATED JOB TITLES
Assembler
Dipper's assistant
Enameller
Shoe machinist

2

Workers in this unit group perform assembly and
routine operative tasks not elsewhere classified in
MINOR GROUP 813: Assemblers and Routine
Operatives.

3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

4

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades. Some employers may set dexterity and
aptitude tests for entrants. Normal colour vision may
be required for some posts. NVQs/SVQs at Levels
1, 2 and 3 are available in a variety of areas.

5

TASKS

6

• follows instructions and drawings and positions
components on work bench or in assembly
machine;

• assembles prepared components in sequence by
soldering, bolting, fastening, spot-welding,
screwing, nailing, stapling, dipping and fastening
using power and hand tools or assembly machine;

7

• rejects faulty assembly components, inspects
finished article for faults, monitors assembly
machine operation and reports any faults;

8

• applies enamel to jewellery and coats, lacquers,
dips and touches up articles (other than ceramic);

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

249

Major Group 8

MINOR GROUP 814
CONSTRUCTION OPERATIVES
Construction operatives erect and dismantle scaffolding and working platforms, maintain
tall structures, construct and maintain public highways and railway tracks, lay and repair
underground piping systems, and perform a variety of tasks in relation to the construction,
maintenance, repair and demolition of buildings.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
8141
8142
8143
8149

1

SCAFFOLDERS, STAGERS, RIGGERS
ROAD CONSTRUCTION OPERATIVES
RAIL CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATIVES
CONSTRUCTION OPERATIVES NEC

2
8141 SCAFFOLDERS, STAGERS,
RIGGERS

3

Workers in this unit group erect and dismantle
scaffolding and working platforms, set up lifting
equipment and ships' rigging, maintain and repair
steeples, industrial chimneys and other tall structures
and install, maintain and repair ropes, wires and
cables.

6

and installs ropes, pulleys and other lifting
tackle;

• forms rope slings, ladders, netting and other
rigging and measures, cuts and repairs wire or
fibre rope.

RELATED JOB TITLES

4

5

• erects jib, derrick and similar hoisting equipment

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Rigger
Scaffolder
Stager (shipbuilding)

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is initially received on-the-job. Skilled
workers must obtain Construction Industry Training
Board (CITB) recognised scaffolders record scheme
cards through the completion of approved courses
and further work experience. NVQs/SVQs in
Scaffolding are available at Levels 2 and 3.

8142 ROAD CONSTRUCTION
OPERATIVES
Workers in this unit group construct, repair and
maintain roads and lay paving slabs and kerbstones
to form pavements and street gutters.

TASKS

7

• examines drawings and specifications to
determine job requirements;

• examines scaffold tubing and couplings for
defects and selects, fits and bolts scaffold tubes
until scaffolding reaches required height;

8

• lays and secures wooden planking to form
working platforms and fixes guard rails, ladders,
cradles and awnings as required;

9
250

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required. Training
is typically provided on-the-job. All sites are required
to have a 'trained operative' registered with the Street
Workers Qualification Register. Trained operatives
are required to attend accredited assessment centres.
NVQs/SVQs in Highway Maintenance and Road
Building are available at Levels 1 and 2.

• checks tightness of bolts and wedges, replaces

• inspects road surfaces for hazards or signs of

damaged rail chairs and repacks ballast under
sleepers if necessary;

deterioration, clears mud, weeds and debris from
road and spreads grit or salt as required;

• lubricates points, examines fences, drains,

• cuts away broken road surface with pick or
pneumatic drill;

• heats bitumen in bucket, applies it to newly laid
asphalt and beats or draws tamper head on asphalt
to close joints;

• spreads bitumen, tar or asphalt and compacts
surface using roller;

• spreads aggregate over road surfaces using

culverts and embankments and carries out any
necessary maintenance;

Major Group 8

TASKS

• spreads ballast and lays sleepers or metal plates
at specified intervals;

• positions lengths of rail, sets of points and
crossovers and secures rail with bolts, wooden
wedges or clips;

• fastens together sections of rail by bolting

1

fishplates to rails.

shovel and lays markings on road surface;

• removes damaged paving slabs and kerb stones,
lays bedding of sand, concrete or mortar on
prepared foundation, lays new slabs or stones
and fills joints with mortar.

2

RELATED JOB TITLES
Leading trackman/woman (railways)
Plate layer
Trackman/woman (railways)

3

RELATED JOB TITLES
Asphalter
Paviour
Road worker

8143 RAIL CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE OPERATIVES
Workers in this unit group lay, re-lay, repair and
examine railway track and maintain surrounding
areas.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Off- and on-the-job training is provided. NVQs/
SVQs in Rail Transport Engineering are available
at Levels 2 and 3.

TASKS

8149 CONSTRUCTION
OPERATIVES NEC
Workers in this unit group operate insulating
equipment, fix plasterboard or dry linings to ceilings
and walls, help construct, maintain, repair and
demolish buildings and clean and resurface eroded
stonework, and lay, join and examine pipe sections
for drainage, gas, water or similar piping systems.

4

5
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in General Construction Operations are
available at Levels 1, 2 and 3.

TASKS

6

7

• fills machine with insulating mixture, positions
hose, drills access hole and fills cavities or coats
surfaces to prevent loss or absorption of heat and
provide fire protection;

• patrols length of track and visually inspects rails,

• selects appropriate plasterboard or dry lining

bolts, fishplates and chairs for distortion or
fracture;

panels, cuts them to required size and fixes them
to ceilings and walls;

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

251

Major Group 8

• cuts, shapes and fits wood, lays bricks and tiles,
cleans exterior surfaces of buildings and
resurfaces eroded stone or brickwork, and
performs other tasks in the construction,
alteration, repair and demolition of buildings;

• selects appropriate asbestos, clay, concrete,
plastic or metal pipe sections and lowers them
into prepared trenches using hoisting equipment;

• joints pipe by sealing with rubber, cement, lead,

1

etc., connects piping to manholes and attaches
pipe junctions as required;

• tests joints with electronic test equipment or by
filling piping with water, smoke or compressed
air.

2

RELATED JOB TITLES

3

Building site foreman
Ceiling fixer
Pipe layer
Thermal insulation engineer

4

5

6

7

8

9
252

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Transport and mobile machine drivers and operatives drive motor vehicles to transport
goods and people, guide and monitor the movement of rail traffic, operate mechanical
equipment on board ships, assist in the boarding, fuelling and movement of aircraft at
airports, operate lifting, earth moving and earth surfacing equipment, agricultural equipment
and other mobile machinery.

Major Group 8

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 82
TRANSPORT AND MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS AND
OPERATIVES

1
MINOR GROUP 821
TRANSPORT DRIVERS AND OPERATIVES
Transport drivers and operatives collect, transport and deliver goods in Large Goods
Vehicles, other lorries and vans, drive road passenger carrying vehicles, instruct people
learning to drive cars and light commercial vehicles, assist train drivers in the operation of
passenger and goods trains, guide the movement of rail coaches in coal mines, sidings and
marshalling yards, control the movement of rail traffic, monitor and inspect the operations
of railways, perform deck duties and operate engines, boilers and mechanical equipment
on board ships, assist in the boarding, fuelling, and movement of aircraft at airports, and
perform other transport related tasks not elsewhere classified.

2

3

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
8211
8212
8213
8214
8215
8216
8217

HEAVY GOODS VEHICLE DRIVERS
VAN DRIVERS
BUS AND COACH DRIVERS
TAXI, CAB DRIVERS AND CHAUFFEURS
DRIVING INSTRUCTORS
RAIL TRANSPORT OPERATIVES
SEAFARERS (MERCHANT NAVY); BARGE, LIGHTER AND BOAT
OPERATIVES
8218 AIR TRANSPORT OPERATIVES
8219 TRANSPORT OPERATIVES NEC

4

5

6

7

8211 HEAVY GOODS VEHICLE
DRIVERS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Large Goods Vehicle (LGV) drivers (formerly HGV
drivers), collect, transport and deliver goods in rigid
vehicles over 7.5 tonnes, articulated lorries and
lorries pulling trailers.

No formal academic entry qualifications are required.
The LGV test incorporates a medical examination,
theory test and assessed road driving. Candidates are
normally at least 21 years old. NVQs/SVQs in
Transporting Goods by Road are available at Level 2.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

253

Major Group 8

• drives vehicle to destination in accordance with

TASKS

schedule;

• checks tyres, brakes, lights, oil, water and fuel
levels and general condition of the vehicle;

• maintains records of journey times, mileage and
hours worked;

• drives vehicle from depot to loading/unloading
point;

• undertakes minor repairs and notifies supervisor
of any mechanical faults.

• assists with loading/unloading and ensures that
load is evenly distributed and safely secured;

• drives vehicle to destination in accordance with
schedule;

1

• maintains records of journey times, mileage and

RELATED JOB TITLES
Delivery driver
Van driver

hours worked;

• undertakes minor repairs and notifies supervisor
of any mechanical faults.

2
RELATED JOB TITLES

3

4

5

6

7

Haulage contractor
HGV driver
Lorry driver
Tanker driver

8212 VAN DRIVERS
Van drivers collect, transport and deliver goods in
vehicles up to 7.5 tonnes in weight.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Entrants must possess a clean car driving licence.
In order to drive vehicles between 3.5 and 7.5 tonnes,
entrants must pass an additional test for a category
C1 licence. NVQs/SVQs in Transporting Goods by
Road are available at Level 2.

levels and general condition of the vehicle;

• drives vehicle from depot to loading/unloading
point;

• assists with loading/unloading and obtains receipts
from customers for goods collected/delivered;

9
254

Bus and coach drivers drive road passenger-carrying
vehicles such as buses, coaches, trams and mini-buses.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though candidates must be in possession of a full
car driving licence. All bus and coach drivers must
pass the Passenger Carrying Vehicle (PCV) test. This
incorporates a theoretical examination and assessed
driving. Entrants to the PCV test must be at least 18
years old. NVQs/SVQs in Transporting Passengers
by Road are available at Levels 2 and 3.

TASKS

• checks tyres, brakes, lights, oil, water and fuel
levels and general condition of the vehicle before
start of journey;

• drives single- and double-decked vehicle over
pre-determined route, complying with traffic
regulations and keeping to time schedule;

• stops and opens and closes doors at pre-arranged

TASKS

• checks tyres, brakes, lights, oil, water and fuel

8

8213 BUS AND COACH DRIVERS

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

places to allow passengers to board and alight,
observing regulations concerning the number of
passengers carried;

• may collect fares from passengers and issue
tickets or ensure that they use a ticket machine;

• may plan routes in conjunction with private hirer
and assist with loading and unloading of luggage;

8215 DRIVING INSTRUCTORS

be responsible for cleanliness of vehicle.

RELATED JOB TITLES

Driving instructors co-ordinate and undertake the
instruction of people learning to drive cars,
motorcycles, buses and haulage vehicles.

Bus driver
Coach driver
PSV driver

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8214 TAXI, CAB DRIVERS AND
CHAUFFEURS
Taxi, cab drivers and chauffeurs drive motor cars
for private individuals, government departments and
industrial organisations, drive taxis for public hire,
drive new cars to delivery points and drive
motorcycles and other motor vehicles.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required but most
entrants require a clean, current driving licence and
a medical examination. Local authorities typically
set their own tests of local knowledge and additional
driving tests before awarding licences.

There are no formal academic requirements.
Candidates must have held a current driving licence
for four out of the last six years, have no motoring
or criminal convictions and be over 21 years old.
To gain registration as an Approved Driving
Instructor, entrants must pass a three-part
examination. Instructors for Large Goods Vehicles
(LGVs) and Passenger Carrying Vehicles (PCVs) are
trained internally or at specialist training
establishments. NVQs/SVQs in Driving Instruction
at Level 3 are available for instructors in all licence
categories.

• checks tyres, brakes, lights, oil, water and fuel
levels and general condition of vehicle before
start of journey;

• drives passenger-carrying motor cars, taxis and
other motor cars and motorcycles, complying
with road and traffic regulations;

• collects passengers when hailed or in response

2

3
• checks instruction and learning standards and
discusses teaching plans with other
instructors;

4

abilities of individual pupils;

• explains driving techniques and assists pupil with
difficulties;

• familiarises pupil with the Highway Code and

5

different road and traffic conditions;

• advises pupil when to apply for theoretical and
practical driving tests and familiarises them with
test procedures and standards.

to telephone/radio message and helps them to
secure their luggage;

• conveys passenger to destination and helps

1

TASKS

• plans lessons in accordance with the needs and
TASKS

Major Group 8

• balances cash taken with tickets sold and may

6

RELATED JOB TITLES

unload luggage;

• cleans, services and maintains vehicle or motorcycle.

Driving instructor
HGV instructor

7

RELATED JOB TITLES

8

Cab driver
Chauffeur
Private hire driver
Taxi driver

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

255

Major Group 8

8216 RAIL TRANSPORT
OPERATIVES
Rail transport operatives assist drivers in the
operation of passenger and goods trains, drive
locomotive engines in coal mines, guide wagons
and coaches in marshalling yards and sidings to
make up trains, operate signals and points to
control the movement of rail traffic, and monitor
the operation of surface and underground
railways.

1
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

2

3

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Candidates may be required to have good hearing,
eyesight, and normal colour vision and pass a
medical examination for entry to some posts.
Training is initially undertaken in training centres,
followed by practical experience on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Rail Transport Operations are available at
Level 2.

TASKS

4

5

6

relief and replacement crews as necessary,
keeps crews informed of any line repairs or
restrictions, and checks train running times for
punctuality;

8217 SEAFARERS (MERCHANT
NAVY); BARGE, LIGHTER
AND BOAT OPERATIVES
Workers in this unit group supervise and carry out a
variety of deck duties and operate and maintain
engines, boilers and mechanical equipment on board
ships.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
although some employers may expect entrants to
possess GCSEs/S grades. Candidates are expected
to pass a medical examination and have good
eyesight. Training takes place at nautical college
and lasts between 11-13 weeks.

TASKS

• ensures that necessary fuel supplies are on board

• examines schedules and decides priority of

and inspects engine, boilers and other
mechanisms for correct functioning;

movement of trains, monitors movement of trains
and issues instructions to drivers, signal
operatives and level crossing keepers;

• removes and repairs or replaces damaged or

• operates signals and opens and closes barriers at
level crossings as required;

worn parts of plant and machinery and ensures
that engine and plant machinery are well
lubricated;

• stows cargo, assists passengers to embark and
disembark, watches for hazards and moors or
casts off mooring ropes as required;

wagons and coaches, guides movement of
carriages using manual points and wagon
breaks, links-up carriages, ensures security of
couplings and reconnects brake and heating
systems;

• steers ship, under the supervision of a duty

• assists drivers in the operation of diesel, diesel-

• performs other deck duties, including servicing

electric, electric and steam locomotives;

8

Level crossing keeper
Railwayman
Shunter
Signalman (railways)

• provides crews for breakdown trains, allocates

• examines shunting instructions, uncouples

7

RELATED JOB TITLES

• checks loading of tubs and carriages, and informs
driver of load distribution and any special
features of route.

9
256

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

officer, checks navigational aids and keeps
bridge, wheel and chartroom clean and tidy;
and maintaining deck gear and rigging, splicing
wire and fibre ropes, greasing winches and
derricks, opening up and battening down hatches,
securing gangways and ladders and lowering and
raising lifeboats.

Boatman/woman
Bo'sun
Deck hand (shipping)
Merchant seaman/woman
Seaman/woman (shipping)

8218 AIR TRANSPORT
OPERATIVES
Air transport operatives refuel, load and unload
aircraft, direct the movement of aircraft at airports,
and positions gangways or staircases to allow
passengers to board and disembark aircraft.

8219 TRANSPORT OPERATIVES
NEC
Workers in this unit group monitor the activities of
bus drivers, conductors and other road transport
depot drivers, undertake various tasks related to
water transportation, and perform other
transportation tasks not elsewhere classified.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is provided both off- and on-the-job.
NVQs/SVQs in Organising Road Transport
Operations and Marine Operations are available at
Level 2.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though employers may require entrants to possess
GCSEs/S grades for some posts. Training is
provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in
Providing Airside Ramp Operations are available at
Level 2.

Major Group 8

RELATED JOB TITLES

2

TASKS

• checks that vehicles run as scheduled, monitors
number of passengers travelling particular routes
and makes recommendations for improvement
of services;

3

• organises relief and replacement crews as
TASKS
•

refuels aircraft from mobile tankers;

•

directs the ground movement of aircraft at
airports;

•

loads and unloads conveyor belts to transport
luggage between terminal buildings and aircraft,
monitors conveyor belts and clears any
blockages;

•

loads aircraft with luggage, in-flight meals,
refreshments and other items;

•

operates retractable gangway or positions mobile
staircases to enable passengers and crew to board
and disembark aircraft.

necessary, ensures compliance with regulations
regarding the carrying of passenger and luggage,
and submits reports of any irregularities;

4

• checks that goods have been correctly loaded
into vehicle, monitors and records information
from tachographs, and arranges for servicing,
refuelling, cleaning and repair of depot
vehicles;

5

• operates lighthouses and locks, opens and closes
moving bridge across inland waterways and
docks, maintains navigational lights in harbours,
assists in mooring craft, and measures depth of
water in canals, rivers, etc. to determine possible
dumping or dredging sites;

6

• guides horses or ponies and drives horse drawn

7

vehicles to transport goods and passengers.
RELATED JOB TITLES
RELATED JOB TITLES
Aircraft handler
Airport hand
Baggage handler
Ramp agent

8

Bus inspector
Lock keeper
Transport supervisor

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

257

Major Group 8

MINOR GROUP 822
MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS AND OPERATIVES
Workers in this minor group drive and operate earth moving and surfacing equipment,
cranes, power driven hoisting machinery, fork-lift trucks, tractor driven and other agricultural
machinery, and operate other mobile machines not elsewhere classified.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
8221
8222
8223
8229

1

2

3

CRANE DRIVERS
FORK-LIFT TRUCK DRIVERS
AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY DRIVERS
MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS AND OPERATIVES NEC

8221 CRANE DRIVERS
Crane drivers supervise and undertake the operation
of cranes, jib cranes, power driven hoisting
machinery and power driven stationary engine to
raise and lower mine and other cages, lift and to move
equipment, materials, machinery and containers.

• watches control panel for warning lights and
indications of wind speed and direction and
carrying capacity of crane;

• oils and greases machine and checks ropes.

RELATED JOB TITLES

4

5

6

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job,
supplemented by short courses. Operators are
required to hold a Certificates of Training
Achievement (CTA) card administered by the
Construction Industry Training Board,
demonstrating basic skills and safety awareness.

TASKS

Banksman (coal mine)
Crane driver/operator
Winding engine operator

8222 FORK-LIFT TRUCK DRIVERS
Fork-lift truck drivers operate fork-lift trucks in
factories, warehouses, storerooms and other areas
to transfer goods and materials.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• gives signals for movement of cage carrying
workers/equipment;

• starts crane or engine motor and checks that cables

7

run freely and that brakes and drum(s) are working;

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is through accredited training schemes
provided in-house or by manufacturers. NVQs/SVQs
in Lift Truck Operations are available at Level 2.

• manipulates levers, switches and pedals to rotate
jibs into position and turns winding drum to raise
or lower hook, bucket or other holding
equipment;

8

• lifts load or cage, or hauls object into required
position and lowers or positions for ground
workers to detach, unload or load;

9
258

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

TASKS

• operates controls to pick up load on forks;
• drives truck to unloading point and lowers forks
to correct position on stack or ground;

correctly refuelled for use;

• keeps records of work undertaken;
• cleans, oils and greases machine.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Fork-lift driver
Fork-lift operator
Fork-lift truck driver
Stacker truck driver

8223 AGRICULTURAL
MACHINERY DRIVERS
Workers in this unit group operate and drive tractordrawn or other machinery to clear and cultivate land
and to sow and harvest plants and crops.

8229 MOBILE MACHINE DRIVERS
AND OPERATIVES NEC
Workers in this unit group supervise and undertake
the operation of machines to transport, excavate,
grade, level, and compact sand, earth, gravel and
similar materials, drive piles into the ground and lay
surfaces of asphalt, concrete and chippings, and
operate other mobile machines not elsewhere
classified in MINOR GROUP 822: Mobile Machine
Drivers and Operatives.

1
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required. On-thejob training is provided. The appropriate current
driving licence will be required for driving on public
highways.

TASKS

• fixes any necessary extensions onto machine and

No academic qualifications are required. Candidates
will require the relevant driving licence to operate
vehicles on public roads. A variety of NVQs/SVQs
in Agriculture are available and incorporate the
operation of agricultural machinery.

• manipulates levers, pedals and switches to

• attaches plough, cultivator, distributor, mower,
baler or other implement to tractor;

• adjusts depth, speed and height of attached
implement according to requirements;

2

3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TASKS

Major Group 8

• ensures that truck is connected to charger or is

loads machine with asphalt, concrete, bitumen,
tar, stone chippings or any other required
materials;

4

manoeuvre vehicle, regulate angle and height of
blades, buckets and hammers and starts conveyor,
suction or water spraying system;

• watches operation and removes any likely
obstacle or obstructions;

5

• directs refilling of machine hopper and repeats
operations as necessary;

• cleans, oils and greases machine and carries out
minor repairs.

6

• drives and operates machinery to plough,
fertilise, plant, cultivate or harvest crops;

RELATED JOB TITLES

• services and maintains equipment and carries out
any minor repairs.

RELATED JOB TITLES

7

Digger driver
Excavator driver
Heavy plant operator
JCB driver
Plant operator (building and contracting)

Agricultural machinist
Tractor driver (agriculture)

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

259

This major group covers occupations which require the knowledge and experience necessary
to perform mostly routine tasks, often involving the use of simple hand-held tools and, in
some cases, requiring a degree of physical effort.

Major Group 9

MAJOR GROUP 9
ELEMENTARY OCCUPATIONS

Most occupations in this major group do not require formal educational qualifications but
will usually have an associated short period of formal experience-related training.
Occupations in this major group are classified into the following sub-major and minor
groups:

91 ELEMENTARY TRADES, PLANT AND STORAGE RELATED
OCCUPATIONS
911
912
913
914

2

ELEMENTARY AGRICULTURAL OCCUPATIONS
ELEMENTARY CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS
ELEMENTARY PROCESS PLANT OCCUPATIONS
ELEMENTARY GOODS STORAGE OCCUPATIONS

3

92 ELEMENTARY ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE
OCCUPATIONS
921
922
923
924
925

1

4

ELEMENTARY ADMINISTRATION OCCUPATIONS
ELEMENTARY PERSONAL SERVICES OCCUPATIONS
ELEMENTARY CLEANING OCCUPATIONS
ELEMENTARY SECURITY OCCUPATIONS
ELEMENTARY SALES OCCUPATIONS

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

261

Major Group 9

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 91
ELEMENTARY TRADES, PLANT AND STORAGE
RELATED OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this sub-major group perform agricultural, fishing and forestry related tasks,
undertake general labouring duties and assist building and construction trades workers,
perform a variety of duties in foundry, engineering and other process and plant related
trades, and assist in the storage and transportation of goods.

1

2

MINOR GROUP 911
ELEMENTARY AGRICULTURAL OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group cultivate and harvest crops, breed and rear animals, catch and
breed fish and other aquatic life and perform forestry and related tasks.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
9111 FARM WORKERS
9112 FORESTRY WORKERS
9119 FISHING AND AGRICULTURE RELATED OCCUPATIONS NEC

3

4

9111 FARM WORKERS
Farm workers perform a variety of tasks, by hand
and machine, to produce and harvest crops and to
breed and rear cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry.

• cleans barns, sheds, pens, yards, incubators and
breeding units and sterilises milking and other
equipment as necessary;

• treats minor ailments and assists veterinary
surgeon as required;

5

6

7

• tends flock of sheep and is responsible for their
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job,
supplemented by vocational training at an
agricultural college. A variety of NVQs/SVQs in
Agriculture are available at Levels 1 and 2.

TASKS

• operates farm machinery to prepare soil, fertilise

welfare;

• implements breeding policy, mates animals and
tends them during birth of young.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Agricultural worker
Farm labourer
Farm worker
Herdsman
Shepherd

and treat crops;

• cultivates growing crops by hoeing, spraying and

8

thinning as necessary;

• weighs and measures foodstuffs, feeds animals
and checks them for any signs of disease;

9
262

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

9112 FORESTRY WORKERS
Forestry workers perform a variety of tasks related
to the planting, cultivation and protection of trees.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

There are no minimum academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job,
supplemented by short courses covering specialised
skills. NVQs/SVQs in Forestry are available at
Levels 1 and 2.

There are no minimum academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job,
supplemented by vocational training at an
agricultural college. A variety of NVQs/SVQs in
Agriculture, Fish Husbandry and Fishing Vessel
Operations are available at Levels 1 and 2.
Fishermen/women are required to undertake a three
day safety course.

TASKS

1

• prepares ground for planting by clearing
vegetation and other debris;

• drains and ploughs land and erects and maintains
fences as necessary;

• collects seeds, plants and prunes trees and selects
and marks trees for felling;

• fells trees using axe or power saw and saws wood
into required lengths;

• removes tops of standing trees and lops branches
as necessary;

• assists in the control of harmful diseases, pests
or forms of wildlife;

• maintains watch for fires and operates firefighting
equipment.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Forestry contractor
Forestry worker
Lumberjack
Timber feller

TASKS

• assists with the shooting, hauling and repairing
of nets, prepares, lays and empties baited pots at
intervals, operates winches and lifting gear, and
guts, sorts and stows fish;

Workers in this unit group perform a variety of tasks
in relation to the breeding and rearing of animals
and fish, catch fish at sea and from inland waterways,
assist in the picking and lifting of crops, plant and
maintain hedges, oversee the incubation and hatching
of eggs and perform other fishing and agriculture
related tasks not elsewhere classified.

2

• harvests oysters, mussels, clams and seaweed off
natural or artificial beds, nets river fish and
maintains them in spawning pens, assists with
feeding and water treatment, and empties and
cleans outdoor tanks;

3

• cleans animals' quarters and renews bedding as
necessary;

• extracts semen for storage, selects appropriate
semen from store, injects recipient animal and
issues certificate giving pedigree and date of
insemination;

4

• incubates eggs in hatchery and supplies chicks
for meat and egg production and game birds for
reserves;

5

• plants cuttings or shrubs, maintains hedges by
clipping, pruning and re-planting, and picks fruit,
vegetables, hops and flowers;

• performs other farming and related tasks not
9119 FISHING AND AGRICULTURE
RELATED OCCUPATIONS
NEC

Major Group 9

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

elsewhere classified including sorting and
marking livestock, catching rabbits, cutting peat,
shearing sheep and sexing chickens.

7
RELATED JOB TITLES
Artificial inseminator
Horticultural worker
Mushroom picker
Nursery worker

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

263

Major Group 9

MINOR GROUP 912
ELEMENTARY CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group assist the work of woodworking and building trades workers,
electricians, plumbers, and painters and perform a variety of general labouring and
construction tasks.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
9121 LABOURERS IN BUILDING AND WOODWORKING TRADES
9129 LABOURERS IN OTHER CONSTRUCTION TRADES NEC

1

2

3

9121 LABOURERS IN BUILDING
AND WOODWORKING
TRADES
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
general labouring and construction duties to assist
building and woodworking trades workers in the
performance of their tasks.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

4

5

No academic qualifications are required. Training
is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in a
variety of construction and craft occupations are
available at Levels 1, 2 and 3.

TASKS

• conveys blocks, bricks, stone, mortar, roofing,

6

felt, slates, wood and other building materials to
the work area;

• assists with the erection of ladders, scaffolding
and work platforms, the rigging of cradles of
hoisting equipment and the attaching of slings,
hooks and guide ropes;

7

• mixes mortar, grouting material, cement screed,
and plaster, and prepares adhesive, primer and
paints and similar construction material;

• cleans equipment and tools, clears work area and

8

otherwise assists building and woodworking
trades workers as directed;

9
264

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

• performs general labouring tasks such as digging
trenches and foundations, removing wall
coverings, and preparing surfaces by cleaning,
sanding, filling, etc.;

• undertakes basic decorating, painting, plumbing,
joinery, and other maintenance and repair tasks.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Builder's labourer
Building worker
Handyman
Hod carrier

9129 LABOURERS IN OTHER
CONSTRUCTION TRADES
NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
labouring occupations in building and civil
engineering not elsewhere classified in MINOR
GROUP 912: Elementary Construction Occupations.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs are available in some areas.

Major Group 9

TASKS

• covers ceilings, floors, walls and exposed
surfaces of boilers, pipes and plant with
insulating material;

• lights oil, coal or other heating vessel and breaks
up blocks of asphalt, bitumen or tar;

• stirs melting mixture, adds aggregate if required,
pours mixture into buckets and turns off heating;

• measures and fixes timber and other structures

1

to support excavations, cables or other rail, signal
and telecommunications equipment;

• erects and repairs fencing, excavates, constructs
and maintains land drainage systems and
prepares graves for burial;

2

• operates, cleans and lubricates valves and sluices,
removes weeds, dead animals and other debris
from water and carries out minor repairs to banks
and footbridges.

3
RELATED JOB TITLES
Drainage worker
Fence erector
Grave digger
Marquee erector
Reservoir attendant

4

5

6

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

265

Major Group 9

MINOR GROUP 913
ELEMENTARY PROCESS PLANT OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group perform a variety of manual tasks in foundry, engineering and
allied trades, assist the work of machine operatives, clean metal goods, machinery and
industrial premises, operate printing machines and reprographic equipment, and wrap, fill,
label and seal containers by hand or machine.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
9131
9132
9133
9134
9139

1

2

3

4

LABOURERS IN FOUNDRIES
INDUSTRIAL CLEANING PROCESS OCCUPATIONS
PRINTING MACHINE MINDERS AND ASSISTANTS
PACKERS, BOTTLERS, CANNERS, FILLERS
LABOURERS IN PROCESS AND PLANT OPERATIONS NEC

9131 LABOURERS IN FOUNDRIES

RELATED JOB TITLES

Workers in this unit group perform various manual
tasks in foundries, engineering and allied trades.

Foundry labourer
Foundry worker

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is provided off- and on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Engineering Material Processing are
available at Level 1.

9132 INDUSTRIAL CLEANING
PROCESS OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this unit group clean manufactured goods,
plant and machinery, and industrial, commercial and
other premises.

5
TASKS

• assists with the charging of furnaces and keeps
furnace area or casting bay clean;

6

7

• supplies moulders with sand and/or molten metal,
assists with pouring molten metal into moulds,
removes castings from moulds and conveys them
to dresser;

• assists in setting up attachments on plant and

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs covering various aspects of industrial cleaning
are available at Levels 1 and 2. Qualifications are
also offered by the British Institute of Cleaning
Science.

machinery, helps load metal billets and operates
saws, shears or other equipment;

• removes scale and scrap metal from work area,

8

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

cleans scale from shears, roll and water channels
and assists with the cleaning and changing of rolls
and otherwise assist blast furnace, teeming,
rolling, tube making, moulding and casting crews
as directed.

9
266

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

TASKS

• uses industrial hoovering, polishing, pressure
washer, steam cleaning and sandblasting
equipment to clean commercial and industrial
premises, public buildings and building exteriors;

industrial plant and machinery, cleans component
parts and reassembles equipment;

• washes, rinses, dries and cleans manufactured

Major Group 9

• dismantles engines, boilers, furnaces and other

RELATED JOB TITLES
Lithographic machine operator
Printer's assistant
Printing machine operator

goods, and stacks cleaned articles ready for
removal.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Cleaner (metal goods mfr)
Hygiene operative

9133 PRINTING MACHINE
MINDERS AND ASSISTANTS
Printing machine minders and assistants set and
operate letterpress, platen or cylinder, lithographic
and photogravure printing machines, photocopiers,
office printers, duplication machines and other
reprographic equipment.

9134 PACKERS, BOTTLERS,
CANNERS, FILLERS
Workers in this unit group pack, wrap, fill, label and
seal containers by hand or machine.

1
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required. Training
is typically provided on-the-job and varies according
to the type of packing and product. Formal courses
are run for specialist packing.

2

TASKS

3

• selects appropriate cylinder, ensures that there
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required. Off- and
on-the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in
Screen Printing are available at Levels 1 and 2, and
in Machine Printing at Levels 2 and 3.

is no corrosion or other damage and fills with
gas;

• fills tubes, ampoules, bottles, drums, barrels,
bags, sacks, cans, boxes and other containers by
hand using measuring/weighing aid or by
positioning container under feeder spout;

4

• packs heavy goods in crates and boxes using
hoist, mobile crane or similar lifting equipment;
TASKS

• loads machine with packaging containers,

reservoirs and loads paper rolls or sheets into
printing press;

materials, adhesive, etc., loads hopper with items
to be packaged/wrapped, monitors filling,
wrapping and packaging, adjusts controls as
necessary and clears any blockages;

• sets controls to control the speed, pressure and

• examines cans, bottles and seals and rejects any

• positions printing plates, loads inks into

ink flow of printing machine;

• loads photocopiers, office printers, duplication
machines and other reprographic equipment with
stationery;

5

6

that are faulty;

• labels goods by hand or machine;
• packs specialist items according to specifications
and completes necessary documentation.

7

• starts reprographic or printing machine and
monitors operation for paper misfeeds and error
messages, removes blockages and replaces
damaged paper, and monitors quality of output;

• sets and operates presses for stamping patterns
and labels on textiles, clothing, pottery, footwear
and other leather goods.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Bottle filler
Packer
Packing machine operator
Wrapper

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

267

Major Group 9

9139 LABOURERS IN PROCESS
AND PLANT OPERATIONS
NEC
Workers in this unit group assist the work of machine
operatives and perform a variety of manual tasks in
process and plant operations.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

1

2

No academic qualifications are required. On-thejob training is provided. NVQs/SVQs may be
available in some areas.

TASKS

• conveys goods, materials, equipment, etc. to

3

work area, assists in setting up machinery and
equipment and prepares tools, lamps and other
equipment for use;

• assists operative to mark out, bend, drill,
galvanise, coat and otherwise machine metal;

• loads and unloads vehicles, trucks and trolleys;

4

• removes finished pieces from work area, paints
or fixes identification labels or markers on
products or containers;

• clears machine blockages, cleans machinery,

5

equipment and tools, keeps work area tidy and
clears waste and any spillages;

• performs a variety of manual tasks in relation to
the operation of coke ovens, boilers and blast
furnaces.

6
RELATED JOB TITLES

7

Electrician's mate
Factory hand (engineering)
Fitter's mate
Labourer (engineering)
Material handler

8

9
268

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this minor group load and unload cargo from ships, boats and barges, supply
berthed ships with water, oil and fuel, load, unload and convey furniture, goods and other
equipment in and around warehouses, depots and similar establishments, and accompany
motor vehicle and other road vehicle drivers.

Major Group 9

MINOR GROUP 914
ELEMENTARY GOODS STORAGE OCCUPATIONS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
9141 STEVEDORES, DOCKERS AND SLINGERS
9149 OTHER GOODS HANDLING AND STORAGE OCCUPATIONS NEC

9141 STEVEDORES, DOCKERS
AND SLINGERS
Stevedores, dockers and slingers supply berthed
ships with water, oil and petroleum, attach chains,
hooks, slings and other grappling attachments to
cargo, and load and unload cargo from ships, boats
and barges.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required. Off- and
on-the-job training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in
Cargo Operations are available at Levels 1 and 2.

TASKS

• attaches hoses to ship's flow connections, starts
pump to transfer oil, petroleum or water to and
from a ship and uncouples hose system when
loading/discharging is complete;

• arranges cargo on quayside or in hold for loading
or unloading, examines type and weight of load
to be moved and selects appropriate hook, chain,
rope, sling or other grappling attachment;

• attaches winch or crane hooks, slings, ropes or
clamps to load, signals to crane driver to
commence lifting, visually checks that load is
balanced and ensures that route is clear for
movement;

• removes slings, hooks, clamps or ropes from
cargo and stows cargo in hold or loads cargo onto
lorries, railway wagons or into warehouses.

1

RELATED JOB TITLES

2

Dock labourer
Dock worker
Docker
Port operator
Slinger
Stevedore

3

9149 OTHER GOODS HANDLING
AND STORAGE
OCCUPATIONS NEC

4

Workers in this unit group convey household and
office furniture, goods, equipment or other items in
or near warehouses, slaughterhouses, shops, goods
depots, etc., prepare requisitions or despatch
documents of stocks held, accompany drivers of road
vehicles, and perform other goods handling and
storage related tasks not elsewhere classified.

5

6

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Distribution and Warehouse Operations are
available at Level 2.

7

TASKS

• loads and unloads goods from removal vans or

8

delivery vehicles either by hand or using trolleys
and lift trucks;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

269

Major Group 9

• packs furniture and household goods into crates
and cartons for storage;

• undertakes the loading and unloading of goods
and conveys goods about storage area;

• retrieves stored items as listed on order sheets,
makes up orders against requisitions and prepares
goods for despatch;

• accompanies driver on journey and assists him/
her with manoeuvres such as reversing;

1

• secures goods to prevent movement or damage

2

RELATED JOB TITLES

during journey and assists driver to load and
unload vehicle.

Store keeper
Storeman
Warehouse assistant
Warehouseman

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
270

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this sub-major group collect, sort and deliver written correspondence, undertake
elementary clerical tasks within offices, perform a variety of carrying, preparation and
serving tasks within hospitals, catering, domestic and other establishments, undertake
elementary cleaning tasks, protect and supervise people and property, and perform
elementary sales related tasks.

Major Group 9

SUB-MAJOR GROUP 92
ELEMENTARY ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE
OCCUPATIONS

1
MINOR GROUP 921
ELEMENTARY ADMINISTRATION OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group collect, receive, sort and deliver mail, documents,
correspondence or messages and perform a variety of elementary clerical tasks within offices.

2

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
9211 POSTAL WORKERS, MAIL SORTERS, MESSENGERS, COURIERS
9219 ELEMENTARY OFFICE OCCUPATIONS NEC

9211 POSTAL WORKERS, MAIL
SORTERS, MESSENGERS,
COURIERS
Workers in this unit group collect, receive, sort and
deliver mail, documents, correspondence or
messages, either between or within establishments.

• sorts mail, parcels and other incoming and
outgoing material for delivery, and maintains
records of material received and despatched;

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
A medical examination may be required. Entrants
complete short induction courses followed by a
programme of off- and on-the-job training. NVQs/
SVQs in Mail Operations are available at Levels 1
and 2.

4

• delivers mail, parcels, correspondence and other
materials to specified or agreed routes and
schedules;

• completes delivery forms, collects charges, and
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

3

5

issues receipts for the collection and delivery of
registered or recorded mail and other items.

RELATED JOB TITLES

6

Courier
Dispatch rider
Messenger
Postal worker
Postman/woman

7

TASKS

• collects mail from post boxes, receives parcels,
and collects correspondence, documents and
other material from individuals, offices or other
establishments;

9219 ELEMENTARY OFFICE
OCCUPATIONS NEC

8

Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
elementary clerical tasks within offices.

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

271

Major Group 9

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Administration are available at Level 1.

TASKS

• copies, duplicates or destroys documents and

1

other records;

• records and retrieves information;
• compiles, sorts and files correspondence;
• distributes internal and external correspondence

2

to office staff.

RELATED JOB TITLES

3

Office junior
Office worker
Paper keeper

4

5

6

7

8

9
272

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Workers in this minor group perform manual tasks to assist nursing and domestic staff in
hospitals, assist guests staying at hotels, perform a variety of cleaning, preparation, carrying
and fetching tasks in kitchens, serves food, beverages and alcoholic drinks in catering,
domestic and other establishments, assist in the operation of cinemas, theatres, amusement
arcades, funfairs, theme parks and holiday camps, and perform other elementary personal
service occupations not elsewhere classified.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
9221
9222
9223
9224
9225
9226
9229

1

HOSPITAL PORTERS
HOTEL PORTERS
KITCHEN AND CATERING ASSISTANTS
WAITERS, WAITRESSES
BAR STAFF
LEISURE AND THEME PARK ATTENDANTS
ELEMENTARY PERSONAL SERVICES OCCUPATIONS NEC

9221 HOSPITAL PORTERS

RELATED JOB TITLES

Hospital porters perform various manual tasks in
hospitals to assist nursing and domestic staff with
the care of patients.

Domestic porter (hospital service)
Hospital porter

Major Group 9

MINOR GROUP 922
ELEMENTARY PERSONAL SERVICES OCCUPATIONS

2

3

4

9222 HOTEL PORTERS
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is provided off- and on-the-job. Entrants
must typically pass a medical examination and may
be required to hold a driving licence.

TASKS

• lifts, escorts and wheels patients between hospital
wards;

Hotel porters meet guests, assist with their luggage
and direct them to an appropriate room in a hotel or
similar establishment.

5

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically provided on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Catering and Hospitality (Portering) are
available at Level 1.

7

• assists with the delivery of meals, laundry,
medical supplies and post to the wards or
theatres;

• collects and disposes of refuse from wards and
other departments;

• assists with unloading and delivery of supplies.

TASKS

• meets guests on arrival and assists with their
luggage;

8

• assists in tidying entrance hall;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

273

Major Group 9

• collects room keys from departing guests and
arranges transport where necessary;

• deals with enquiries regarding hotel services and
local amenities.

Counterhand
Dining room assistant
Kitchen assistant
Kitchen porter
Washer-up (hotels, catering, public houses)

RELATED JOB TITLES

9224 WAITERS, WAITRESSES
Hall porter
Hotel porter
House porter

Waiters and waitresses serve food and beverages in
hotels, clubs, restaurants and other establishments.

9223 KITCHEN AND CATERING
ASSISTANTS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Workers in this unit group assist in the preparation
and service of food and beverages in restaurants,
cafés and other eating establishments, and perform
various cleaning, fetching and carrying tasks.

There are no formal academic entry requirements,
though some employers may require GCSEs/S
grades. Training is typically provided on-the-job.
NVQs/SVQs in Food and Drink Service are available
at Levels 1 and 2.

1

2

3

4

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Food and Drink Service are available at
Levels 1 and 2, and in Kitchen Portering at Level 1.

• cleans or prepares food for cooks by hand or

from delivery van to storeroom and from
storeroom to kitchen;
crockery, cutlery, glassware, kitchen utensils and
disposes of rubbish;
refreshments, accepts payment and gives change;

• takes down orders for food and/or drinks and
passes order to kitchen;

• serves food and drinks;
• presents bill and accepts payment at end of the
meal.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Head waiter/waitress
Waiter/waitress

• keeps service area well stocked.
RELATED JOB TITLES

8

• presents menus and wine lists to patrons and may

• cleans and tidies service area, kitchen surfaces,

• prepares and serves beverages and light

7

glassware;

machine;

• carries meat, vegetables and other foodstuffs

6

• sets tables with clean linen, cutlery, crockery and

describe dishes and advise on selection of food
or wines;

TASKS

5

TASKS

Canteen assistant
Catering assistant

9
274

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

9225 BAR STAFF
Bar staff prepare, mix and serve alcoholic and nonalcoholic drinks and beverages at bars in public
houses, hotels, clubs and other establishments.

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs in Food and Drink Service are available at
Levels 1 and 2.

TASKS

• assists in keeping bar properly stocked;

• welcomes holidaymakers, provides information
about holiday camp, organises and participates
in entertainment and activities for guests.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Arcade attendant
Fairground worker
Funfair attendant
Usher/usherette

1

• washes used glassware and cleans bar area;
• takes customer orders and mixes and serves
drinks;

• receives payment for drinks.
RELATED JOB TITLES
Bar assistant
Bar steward/stewardess
Barman/maid/person

9229 ELEMENTARY PERSONAL
SERVICES OCCUPATIONS
NEC
Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
elementary personal service occupations not
elsewhere classified in MINOR GROUP 922:
Elementary Personal Services Occupations.

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job.

Leisure and theme park attendants monitor the
operation of amusement arcades, check tickets of
entry to theatres and cinemas and show people to
their seats, operate rides at funfairs and theme parks,
and entertain and look after guests at holiday camps.

TASKS

4

• assists in the movement of scenery and other

5

stage equipment;

• loads numbered balls into bingo machine, starts
machine, removes balls and reads numbers, and
checks winning bingo cards against numbers
drawn;

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is typically received on-the-job. NVQs/
SVQs are available in some areas.

• examines and collects tickets at harbours, piers

TASKS

• collects payment, issues tickets and monitors the

• checks tickets of people entering cinemas and

2

3

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

9226 LEISURE AND THEME PARK
ATTENDANTS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

Major Group 9

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

and similar thoroughfares or establishments not
elsewhere classified;
use of bathing huts, changing rooms, bath houses
and deck chairs.

7

theatres, and directs people to their seats;

• operates rides and supervises stalls at fairgrounds
and amusement parks;

• issues change at amusement arcades, monitors
the operation of arcade machines and empties
coins from machines;

RELATED JOB TITLES

8

Bingo caller
Bingo operative
Stage hand (entertainment)

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

275

Major Group 9

MINOR GROUP 923
ELEMENTARY CLEANING OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group clean windows, chimneys, roads, and interiors of buildings,
wash, dry and press household linen, clean carpets, curtains and similar articles, collect
refuse from business and private premises, and perform other elementary cleaning tasks
not elsewhere classified.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
9231
9232
9233
9234
9235
9239

1

2

3

4

5

WINDOW CLEANERS
ROAD SWEEPERS
CLEANERS, DOMESTICS
LAUNDERERS, DRY CLEANERS, PRESSERS
REFUSE AND SALVAGE OCCUPATIONS
ELEMENTARY CLEANING OCCUPATIONS NEC

9231 WINDOW CLEANERS

9232 ROAD SWEEPERS

Window cleaners wash and polish windows and other
glass fittings.

Workers in this unit group sweep and remove refuse
from public thoroughfares and clean soot and
deposits from flues and chimneys.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

No academic qualifications are required. On-thejob training may be available in larger firms. NVQs/
SVQs in Cleaning: Windows, Glass and Façade
Surfaces at Level 2 are available.

No academic qualifications are required. On-thejob training is provided. NVQs/SVQs in Cleaning:
Highways and Land are available at Levels 1 and 2.

TASKS

• sweeps pavements, gutters and roadways with

TASKS

6

hand broom;

• secures ladders and other equipment to gain
access to glass;

• selects appropriate cleaning or polishing
implement;

7

• washes and polishes glass with brushes, cloths,

• shovels refuse into containers and empties public
litter bins into containers;

• selects appropriate brush head and pushes it
through flue or chimney, collects soot and other
dislodged material with brush or vacuum
equipment.

water, solvents and squeegees.
RELATED JOB TITLES

8

RELATED JOB TITLES
Window cleaner

9
276

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Chimney sweep
Road sweeper
Street cleaner

TASKS

Cleaners and domestics clean interiors of private
houses, shops, hotels, schools, offices, other
buildings, ships, aircraft, trains and road vehicles
and wash and polish vehicle exteriors.

• receives garment or item from customer for
cleaning, checks pockets, buttons, zips, etc. and
issues receipt;

• sorts articles by fabric, colour and type and
determines appropriate cleaning process;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

• removes difficult stains using chemicals or steam

No academic qualifications are required. On-the-job
training may be provided. NVQs/SVQs in Cleaning:
Building Interiors are available at Levels 1 and 2.

• loads articles into washing and dry cleaning

TASKS

• scrubs, washes, sweeps and polishes floors,
corridors and stairs;

• dusts and polishes furniture and fittings;
• cleans toilets and bathrooms;
• washes down walls and ceilings;

Major Group 9

9233 CLEANERS, DOMESTICS

gun;
machines or electrically operated drum cleaning
machine, operates controls to admit cleaning
fluids and starts machine;

1

• sets and operates tumble drying machines and
smoothes and shapes washed garments using
hand iron or machine press;

• allocates washing machines to customers, ensures

2

correct use of equipment and gives change;

• performs a variety of laundering, dry cleaning
and pressing tasks not elsewhere classified,
including beating carpets and shaping starched
collars, cuffs and hats.

3

• empties ashtrays, waste bins and removes
rubbish;

• cleans, polishes and vacuums the interior
surfaces of motor cars.

RELATED JOB TITLES
Car valeter
Chambermaid
Cleaner
Domestic
Domestic cleaner

9234 LAUNDERERS, DRY
CLEANERS, PRESSERS
Launderers, dry cleaners and pressers supervise and
undertake the washing, dry cleaning, ironing and
pressing of household and other linen, carpets and
other articles.

RELATED JOB TITLES

4

Carpet cleaner
Dry cleaner
Garment presser
Hoffman presser
Laundry assistant
Laundry worker

5
9235 REFUSE AND SALVAGE
OCCUPATIONS
Refuse and salvage collectors supervise and
undertake the collection and processing of refuse
from household, commercial and industrial premises.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

6

7

No academic qualifications are required. Training
is provided on-the-job.
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
TASKS
Academic qualifications may be required. Training
is mainly on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs in Laundering are
available at Levels 1 and 2.

8

• rides in or on refuse vehicle and alights to pick
up domestic refuse;

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

277

Major Group 9

• carries waste material in dustbins or other
• empties refuse into vehicle manually or using an
electronic tipping device;

• returns dustbins or other containers to premises;
• collects scrap metal, salvage, paper and other
recyclable material from domestic and industrial
premises, and sorts material in preparation for
recycling;

1

• attends the operation of refuse tips, supervises

2

RELATED JOB TITLES

the use of public refuse disposal facilities, and
compacts and covers up refuse at landfill sites.

Binman/woman (refuse collection)
Dustman/woman
Recycling operative
Refuse collector

3
9239 ELEMENTARY CLEANING
OCCUPATIONS NEC

4

5

Workers in this unit group perform elementary
cleansing service occupations not elsewhere
classified in MINOR GROUP 923: Elementary
Cleaning Occupations.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No formal academic qualifications are required.
Training may be provided on-the-job.

6
TASKS

• cleans toilets, washrooms, rest rooms and other

7

similar amenities;

• replenishes supplies of soap, toilet paper and
towels;

• reports acts of vandalism and any defects in

8

RELATED JOB TITLES

containers from premises to refuse vehicle;

sanitary equipment;

• completes worksheets to note the date and time
that facilities were last cleaned.

9
278

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Hygiene cleaner
Toilet cleaner
Wash room attendant

Workers in this minor group protect individuals or property from injury, theft or damage,
patrol areas to detect and prevent parking infringements, assist children in crossing roads,
supervise the activities of school children during break and meal times, control the parking
of vehicles in car parks, and perform other elementary security tasks not elsewhere classified.

Major Group 9

MINOR GROUP 924
ELEMENTARY SECURITY OCCUPATIONS

Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
9241
9242
9243
9244
9245
9249

SECURITY GUARDS AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
TRAFFIC WARDENS
SCHOOL CROSSING PATROL ATTENDANTS
SCHOOL MIDDAY ASSISTANTS
CAR PARK ATTENDANTS
ELEMENTARY SECURITY OCCUPATIONS NEC

9241 SECURITY GUARDS AND
RELATED OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this unit group protect merchandise,
individuals, hotels, offices, factories, public grounds
and private estates from injury, theft or damage.

1

2

• monitors and patrols hotels, factories, offices and
other premises, forests, parks, and public or
private estates to prevent theft and unauthorised
entry;

• checks persons and vehicles entering and leaving
premises, establishes their credentials and
arranges for escorts for visitors;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
For some vacancies a current and clean driving
licence is required and entrants may have to pass a
medical examination. Training is typically provided
on-the-job. NVQs/SVQs covering various aspects
of security guarding are available at Level 2.

TASKS

• investigates crimes, trading practices and the
private affairs of individuals;

• walks or rides near person requiring protection,
watches for suspicious occurrences and defends
guarded person from attack;

3

4

• receives duty sheet, time-clock and keys for
premises to be visited, checks locks, doors,
windows, etc. and reports any suspicious
circumstances to security headquarters;

5

• calls in civil police and gives evidence in court
where necessary.

6
RELATED JOB TITLES
CCTV operator
Door keeper
Night watcher
Private detective
Security officer
Store detective

7

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

279

Major Group 9

9242 TRAFFIC WARDENS

TASKS

Traffic wardens patrol assigned areas to detect and
prevent infringements of local parking regulations.

• meets children wanting to cross the road and
directs them to wait at the kerb;

• waits for a safe gap in traffic and walks to the
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

centre of road;

• signals approaching traffic to stop by using hand
signals and school crossing signs;

1

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Candidates should be at least 18 years of age (in
some areas 20-25+) and may be required to pass a
medical examination. Training is typically provided
on-the-job.

• directs children to cross the road when safe.
RELATED JOB TITLES
Lollipop man/lady
School crossing patrol officer

TASKS

2

• patrols assigned area to detect vehicles parked
in no-parking zones and vehicles parked in excess
of permitted time in restricted parking zones;

• warns offenders or issues tickets;

3

9244 SCHOOL MIDDAY
ASSISTANTS
Workers in this unit group supervise the activities of
school children during break and meal times.

• advises motorists on local parking facilities and
directs them as required;

• notes any cases of obstruction, evasion of tax or
other infringement and reports them to the police;

4

• gives evidence in court as required.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Some employers may expect candidates to show
previous experience in caring for children.

RELATED JOB TITLES

5

Parking meter attendant
Traffic warden
Wheel clamper

TASKS

• supervises the playground activities of children
during meal and break times;

• cares for sick children and administers first aid

6

9243 SCHOOL CROSSING PATROL
ATTENDANTS
School crossing patrol attendants assist children to
cross roads near to the entrances of schools.

7

• sets up and dismantles dining room furniture;
• assists young children with feeding, dressing,
washing and toiletry activities.

RELATED JOB TITLES
TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

8

if necessary;

There are no formal academic entry requirements.
Training is provided off- and on-the-job.

9
280

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

Dinner supervisor
Lunchtime supervisor
Midday assistant (schools)
Supervisory assistant (school meals)

TASKS

Car park attendants control the parking of vehicles
in public and private car parks, and operate passenger
and goods lifts in commercial, industrial, residential
and other establishments.

• serves summonses and, on court authority, takes
possession of goods to the value of outstanding
debt;

• accepts payment on behalf of court and issues
receipts;

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
No academic qualifications are required. On-thejob training is provided.

Major Group 9

9245 CAR PARK ATTENDANTS

• ejects persons in illegal occupation of premises;
• watches for illegal fishing or attempted
smuggling;

• deals with any security difficulties in art galleries

1

and museums, clubs, public houses, employers'
establishments and other buildings;
TASKS

• receives clothing, luggage and other articles,
• regulates entry/exit of vehicles to and from car
parks and may park cars;

collects fee and issues ticket and returns item to
depositor on presentation of receipt.

2

• issues and examines tickets in car parks, collects
charges and gives change;

RELATED JOB TITLES

• operates push-button or hand controls to raise
and lower lifts to required floor;

• ensures safety of goods and passengers carried
in lift.

3

Commissionaire
Court bailiff
Court usher
Museum attendant

4

RELATED JOB TITLES
Car park attendant
Lift attendant
Parking attendant

5

9249 ELEMENTARY SECURITY
OCCUPATIONS NEC

6

Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
elementary security occupations not elsewhere
classified in MINOR GROUP 924: Elementary
Security Occupations.

7

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no formal academic entry requirements.
For some vacancies a current and clean driving
licence is required and entrants may have to pass a
medical examination. Off- and on-the-job training
may be provided.

8

9
Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

281

Major Group 9

MINOR GROUP 925
ELEMENTARY SALES OCCUPATIONS
Workers in this minor group remove and replace posters from hoardings, bill boards and
other advertising spaces, replenish stocks of goods in retail establishments, collect and
issue shopping trolleys and baskets, and perform other elementary sales related tasks.
Occupations in this minor group are classified into the following unit groups:
9251 SHELF FILLERS
9259 ELEMENTARY SALES OCCUPATIONS NEC

1

2

3

4

5

9251 SHELF FILLERS
Shelf fillers receive incoming goods from storage,
check them for damage and place them on the
appropriate shelves in the store.

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS
There are no minimum academic entry
requirements. Some on-the-job training may be
provided.

There are no minimum academic entry requirements.
Some on-the-job training may be provided.

• selects goods from storeroom and checks for any

• strips old posters from hoardings and fits new

determine the appropriate shelf location for the
goods;

• prices goods by machine and fills shelves with
goods;

• monitors depletion of stocks and re-fills shelves

8

TYPICAL ENTRY ROUTES AND
ASSOCIATED QUALIFICATIONS

TASKS

• checks store layout or written instructions to

7

Workers in this unit group perform a variety of
elementary sales related occupations not elsewhere
classified in MINOR GROUP 925: Elementary Sales
Occupations.

TASKS

damage;

6

9259 ELEMENTARY SALES
OCCUPATIONS NEC

as required.

posters using brushes and working from a ladder
if necessary;

• collects shopping baskets and trolleys in and
around wholesale/retail establishments and
positions near entrance to store;

• offers shopping baskets to customers entering
retail establishments;

• uses a pricing gun to attach price labels on goods
for sale.

RELATED JOB TITLES

RELATED JOB TITLES

Display assistant (shelf filling)
Shelf filler
Stock handler

Bill poster
Ticket checker (wholesale, retail trade)
Trolley collector (wholesale, retail trade)

9
282

Standard Occupational Classification 2000 Volume 1

